The Labour Party issued leaflets in Dunfermline and Cowdenbeath saying that it backed the freeze and would continue to do so. Did it run them past the member before it put them out?

Will Richard Baker give way?

As other members have said, the issue is complex. It is fair to say that, if there were a simple solution to it, we would probably have arrived at it by now. Nonetheless, I hope to offer some suggestions of how we might tackle new psychoactive substances. I noted the report that the House of Commons Home Affairs Select Committee produced in December, which spoke about there being an epidemic of new psychoactive substances and outlined a range of points on which the select committee wanted the Home Office—because, obviously, it has the powers on drugs law—to take action. I am sure that the Scottish Government will be consulted at all times during that process. My colleague Graeme Dey mentioned head shops. He was correct to highlight that there is a difficulty in cracking down on such shops, but I recently noted reports in the Aberdeen Evening Express of action that Police Scotland took against at least one of those premises in the city of Aberdeen. There are a number of such premises in Aberdeen, including at least one in my constituency. As has been identified, the difficulty is that some, but not all, of the substances to which we are referring are often found within, or are predominant components of, items that can be purchased legally in other ways. Therefore, simply to ban the chemical compound would not necessarily solve the problem and may lead to other problems in other areas. It is not quite as simple as banning a certain chemical compound, because that can have a knock-on effect on items that are perfectly legally available already. To come on to where Parliament perhaps has some legislative competence on the issue, we need to consider whether regulation can be put in place, particularly through licensing legislation. The other aspect, besides the argument about banning chemical compounds, is the paraphernalia that head shops sell. As others have said, although what they sell is probably more commonly associated with use of illegal drugs, it also includes paraphernalia that could—I emphasise “could”—be used for legitimate purposes. Perhaps considering whether licensing legislation could be applied to such premises or the products that are sold in them might allow greater scrutiny of their operations, much tighter controls by the police and more regular visits by the police and trading standards officers without the need for tip-offs on activity, or other leads to follow. It would be part of the normal licensing renewal regime. That would also allow the opportunity to consider whether burdens could be placed on the distributors of the products—for example, a requirement to ensure that they are confident that a product that they are selling will be used responsibly. When we license people to sell alcohol, we assume that they will take the necessary steps to ensure that the people who purchase alcohol are of the correct age to purchase alcohol and that they will not distribute that alcohol to people who are underage once they have purchased it. Such elements could be built into legislation. I hope that the minister will consider that. A more difficult issue is online sales, which my colleague, Willie Coffey, and Claire Baker mentioned. This is not a new issue, nor is it unique to the problem that we are discussing. As Claire Baker and Alison McInnes rightly identified, it will require that work be done locally, around these islands and across the international stage in Europe and beyond. It is worth taking the opportunity to apply pressure to internet service providers to ensure that they think about how that content is accessed. Willie Coffey spoke about the fact that such websites are blocked on his server. Other servers might not have that safeguard in place, and controls might need to be applied by the user. Again, we need to think about that and determine whether pressure can be applied to internet service providers to ensure that they think about how they regulate the content that is being made available to the people who sign up to their service. We also need to be cognisant of the impact and role of social media. We must be cognisant not just of the welcome role that they will play in promotion of the Scottish Government’s message or how they have brought together people who are concerned about the issue—as in Arbroath, as was highlighted by Graeme Dey and Alex Johnstone—but of how they are used to promote and share information on new psychoactive substances and where and how they can be obtained. We need to examine how that is being done and think about applying pressure to social media providers to ensure that they are aware that their sites are being used in that way, and to suggest to them that they need to think about how they regulate the content that is being uploaded to their forums. Work is being done in the north-east with schools, the police and local authorities working together to raise awareness. We have to ensure that we are vigilant throughout the process. There is a fine balance to be struck between raising awareness of the dangers and avoiding raising awareness of the availability. That also needs to be factored in. There is cross-party consensus on the issue, which is welcome. If we work together, we will reach some form of resolution.

Does Patrick Harvie agree that the message that amendment 27 sends, based on the stipulations within it, is that somehow same-sex marriage can have only negative consequences?

I have two points. Stewart Maxwell has summed up the first point eloquently. It is not for us to second-guess people’s motivations in defining their relationships. If individuals wish to enter into a civil partnership rather than a marriage, that is none of our business. It is up to the two individuals to define their relationship. I have sympathy with Patrick Harvie’s amendment 28, in that the option of a civil partnership is not available to heterosexual couples at the moment, as he said. I disagree with much that my colleague Dave Thompson has said on the issue, but he makes the valid point—Jamie Hepburn made it, too—that civil partnerships might no longer be necessary. However, we need a thorough examination of the matter. Individuals in my circle of friends and constituents of mine have expressed the view that, if civil partnerships were available to mixed-sex couples, they would be willing or would wish to take up that opportunity. It is not for us to second-guess relationships. As for Alex Johnstone’s flippant intervention, the review that was discussed in relation to amendment 27 was being pursued from an entirely negative perspective.

I have never second-guessed the outcome of a review. I believe that Patrick Harvie is pursuing a review for positive and inclusive reasons to do with ensuring equality of status for civil partnerships while they still exist—indeed, as my colleague Jamie Hepburn said, they might not be necessary. I do not believe that the review that was proposed in amendment 27 was being pursued from a positive perspective. That is why I rejected that amendment. I will be happy to hear the cabinet secretary’s views before I decide whether to support amendment 28.

2. To ask the Scottish Government whether it plans to amend the statutory consultation period for school closure decisions by local authorities. (S4O-02858)

The cabinet secretary might be aware that, later today, Aberdeen City Council will finally abandon the proposals to close Bramble Brae and Middleton Park schools. The decision to consult on those proposals was taken on 7 February 2013, meaning that the entire process has lasted just a week short of a full calendar year. It took six months from the decision to consult to the consultation actually beginning. Can the cabinet secretary consider the issue of timescales between decisions to consult and the commencement of consultations, because protracted delays lead to great uncertainty and anxiety for pupils, parents and communities?

I might pass on the run, Presiding Officer. I hope that Hanzala Malik will forgive me, as a representative of the city of Aberdeen, for stumbling into the debate with a few things to say about the positive impact of the Commonwealth games on my city and constituency. The minister was indeed correct when she said that these are Glasgow’s games, but they are also Scotland’s games, so we must ensure that people across the country have the opportunity to get involved and be enthused before, during and after the games. In the build-up to London 2012, Aberdeen hosted the Cameroon Olympic team as part of its pre-games training camp. That created a buzz in the city for many whose only association with Cameroon in sport had been the Roger Milla shuffle at the 1990 world cup. At the same time as the athletes warmed to the city, the city warmed to the athletes. Idrissa Adam, the 100m sprinter, took part in a local event with athletes at Aberdeen sports village. The women’s football team played a friendly against the Scottish women’s team as part of its build-up to the games. The city was abuzz; there was a real enthusiasm among the people. I hope that, ahead of Glasgow 2014, Aberdeen City Council will again look to host a training camp for a Commonwealth team, because that would help to create a similar buzz, enthusiasm and participation. A number of events are taking place in Aberdeen that will help to create that enthusiasm in advance of the games. I learned about an event just recently that is taking place in my constituency: the Oldmachar Commonwealth games, which are being organised by Middleton Park primary school. The games will involve the five primary schools from the Oldmachar academy associated schools group—Danestone, Middleton Park, Forehill, Glashieburn and Greenbrae—and 525 pupils across primary 4 to 7 will receive 240 quality hours of sports coaching to build skills, confidence and enthusiasm to empower them to compete in the games, which are taking place at the sports village in June. Pupils will compete across a range of events and they will have their own torch parade. On 6 February, Clyde, the Commonwealth games mascot, will launch the event at Middleton Park school. The school has received £6,624 funding from Celebrate to help it to host the games, and I look forward to that wonderful event taking place. We are also seeing the development of sports hubs across the country. The first disability sports hub in Scotland was launched at the Aberdeen sports village. It provides support and advice for disabled individuals—people with physical, sensory and learning disabilities—and offers them, their families and friends opportunities to participate in a variety of activities that are suitable for all ages and abilities. That is a wonderful part of the legacy of sport. We should not forget that we were all inspired by the efforts of the paralympians at London 2012, and the use of the disability sports hub emphasises further that sport is for everyone and not just the able bodied. The Beacon centre in my constituency will soon be developed as a sports hub, too, and I look forward to that taking place. The sports village is also offering a Commonwealth sports tour project. That will involve 400 pupils from primary 4 to secondary 2 taking part in a 10-week programme of one-hour sessions. It will allow our children to engage in and get a flavour of 10 different Commonwealth sports. That is good because, as other members have highlighted, the PE curriculum does not necessarily allow children to get a proper flavour of some of the sports opportunities that are available. Young people who may have an aptitude for a specific sport may find that that cannot be offered to them as part of their regular PE sessions, so such opportunities to try out different sports—sports that they might not otherwise engage in—may result in them finding a sport with which they click. The legacy activity is also important for sustaining interest beyond the games. From a constituency perspective, I noted that Quarryhill primary school has been successful in bidding for legacy funding to develop its playground space to increase physical activity and boost active play and PE. That is welcome. Such projects will take place throughout Scotland, which emphasises the point that, although Glasgow bid for and won the games—I absolutely accept that—we want the benefits of the games to be spread throughout the country in their aftermath. The minister mentioned street soccer. My understanding is that the sessions in Aberdeen have been extremely well attended. Street soccer, midnight football and similar events are always popular with young people. I am sure that that, too, will help to boost activity and participation. Volunteers have also been mentioned. I chose not to volunteer for the games largely because my family does not see enough of me as it is, but I congratulate Mr Mason on being a volunteer. I am sure that he will prove to be most useful to people who visit Glasgow for the games. A friend of mine who is a medical student is going to be a volunteer doctor at the games. Not many people might have been aware that that role was offered as a volunteering opportunity. It is an excellent way to get people involved in volunteering for the games. We should not lose sight of the fact that sporting events will take place throughout the year. In Aberdeen, there will be a Scotland v England women’s rugby international and the Commonwealth water polo championships will take place at the new aquatics centre that is being developed there. A one-day cricket international, which I am sure will enthuse Liz Smith, will take place in Aberdeen. The Queen’s baton relay will also visit the city. As well as that, I was pleased to see further investment in an artificial football pitch—or multi-use pitch, as they are now known—for Dyce in my constituency, which will be jointly funded by the Scottish Government’s cashback scheme and Aberdeen City Council. All those developments and events taking place mean that, although Aberdeen is three hours away from Glasgow—I hope that people who visit the games will also take the opportunity to come up to Aberdeen and see what we have to offer after they have been to Edinburgh—it does not feel remote from the Commonwealth games but feels part of them. We want to encourage all areas of Scotland to feel that they are a part of the Commonwealth games.

As the cabinet secretary will be aware, the Bucksburn service centre is located in my constituency. A number of my constituents are employed at that facility and at the Aberdeen control rooms. As Kevin Stewart has mentioned, those facilities have a reputation for excellence and are highly regarded. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the quality of service provided must be an important factor in any decision that the boards take?

As a previous member of the Health and Sport Committee, I know that the question has often been asked at committee meetings about where disinvestment should take place to allow for further investment in the areas that are recognised by the groups that Mr Findlay has highlighted. Does Mr Findlay have any suggestions, because often none is forthcoming?

The member is making a very measured and sensible speech. However, NHS boards are reviewed annually and the NHS is also reviewed through Healthcare Improvement Scotland, and the Care Inspectorate reviews the wider care agenda. What is the Labour Party calling for that would add to that on-going work?

I said in my intervention during Hugh Henry’s speech that I thought that it had struck a very measured tone. I thought that Hugh Henry was a little uncharitable about my intervention, but I asked my question in a genuine spirit of trying to understand where exactly the Labour motion is coming from, because the term “review” in it covers many options. We have heard Labour members say that they want a wholesale review, but they have also said that they want to look at baseline reviews in certain areas. Would a review cover everything? Would it cover only some things? Would it cut across the other work that I highlighted in my intervention as being done and therefore risk duplication of effort, particularly in terms of annual reviews? We do not know the answers, because no real terms of reference for a review or ideas about where a review would go and lead to have been laid out. The Labour Party needs to work out whether it is trying to be an Opposition party aspiring to government or a lobbying organisation. If it wants to be a party that aspires to government, there is nothing wrong with it coming to the chamber and articulating the concerns that are expressed by others. However, all that we have at the moment is a skeleton that is absolutely bereft of the meat of policy intention from the Labour Party. We need to know what exactly the Labour Party hopes to get out of a review.

I think that, rather than nailing that, Mr Findlay hit himself on the thumb. He needs to understand that, as I said, I do not have a problem with people coming to the chamber and articulating the concerns that are expressed outside it, but the point is that the Labour Party has to add to that by describing what its policy intentions would be in relation to such a review. I will come back to that, perhaps, at the end of my speech.

Mr Findlay is ever the dramatist. I could cite many improvements in NHS performance, as colleagues throughout the chamber have done, and I will highlight some of them later, but I could also highlight areas in which the NHS has identified, or it has been identified by others, that there is a need for improvement. Other members on the SNP benches have done that as well. The difficulty that I have with the way in which the debate is framed—this is why I was struck by the approach that Mr Henry took—is that, too often, we hear from the Opposition cries of, “You’re being complacent” when things are going well and cries of, “Everything’s in crisis” when things need to be improved. The reality tends to be in neither of those extremities. We entirely understand that, in a human organisation such as the national health service, there will always be areas that need to be improved. With the volume of patients who are seen each day, things will sometimes go wrong. We all get constituents coming to our surgeries to tell us of individual circumstances in which things have not gone to the high standards to which we aspire. The big danger that we may fall into is to take individual cases and try to describe them as the norm and as what is happening elsewhere in the national health service. That is not something that is recognised by the health professionals to whom I speak when I raise constituency concerns in my area. I want to touch on dentistry, which has not been mentioned in the debate. Indeed, it is not mentioned much in health debates. We can see the improvements that have taken place in that area since the Government came into office. I recall, prior to the 2007 election, the queues round the block in the town of my birth—Inverurie in the north-east of Scotland—and many other north-east communities as people sought to gain access to NHS dentistry. However, since 2006, across Scotland, there has been a 32.6 per cent increase in the number of NHS general dental services registered dentists. That is 793 additional dentists since 2006. As a result, the waiting lists for NHS dentistry in Grampian have plummeted and the number of people who are waiting to access NHS dentistry is almost at zero. That is due to the additional NHS practices that have opened up in the city of Aberdeen—I cite Dyce in my constituency as having a new dentist in the community that is accepting NHS patients—but I suspect that it is also down to the Aberdeen dental school, which was opened in 2009 by this SNP Government. I recall that, at the time, the Liberal Democrats doubted the potential of that facility to eradicate dental waiting lists in the NHS Grampian area. Mike Rumbles said that it would not remove the waiting list problems. I note that it is not just NHS dental waiting lists that have been virtually eradicated in the north-east of Scotland since that bold statement was made by Mike Rumbles; it is also the Liberal Democrats. As always with the NHS, the issue is about choices, and it is about parties laying out the choices that they would make. In every budget, the Government lays out the choices that it is making in relation to the national health service, and my colleagues will know that, at every meeting of the Health and Sport Committee at which the budget was discussed, I raised the question of disinvestment versus additional investment. When I raised that with Mr Findlay, he said that that is what he wants a review for. He wants a review to tell him how the NHS money should be spent. If he wants to be the next health secretary, he needs to stop leaving it to other people to do his homework for him.

Jackson Carlaw must accept that there is a link in respect of the Barnett consequentials, and that any reduction in health spending south of the border would impact on the health budget of this Parliament. I accept that the link is not complete, but it is still there.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Last night and today on television, two of Mr Gray’s shadow cabinet colleagues have outlined Labour’s plans to scrap the small business bonus. How will that help the Scottish economy?

Will the member give way?

The member questions whether this is an appropriate way of tackling child poverty. However, does she not accept that the Child Poverty Action Group Scotland’s backing for universal free school meals suggests that the policy will go some way towards tackling child poverty in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Neil Findlay’s response to Patrick Harvie was possibly one of the best examples of logical gymnastics that I have ever seen. At least Patrick Harvie’s position on corporation tax policy is consistent, although he and I might disagree on it. Neil Findlay says that it is okay if corporation tax gets cut as long as it is cut across the whole of the United Kingdom by a Labour Government, which is not a very socialist policy for him to take. Neil Findlay rose— No; Mr Findlay did not let me in, so I will not let him in. I was interested to hear Mr Findlay say that we need to leave it to councils to decide their own priorities, given that at the same time he is backing a proposal for a bill by one of his party’s members that would take powers away from councils in relation to bedroom tax evictions. It is okay for the Labour Party to take powers away from councils when it suits it, but when the Scottish Government introduces a policy of free school meals, the Labour Party says, “Oh, you can’t dictate to councils.” I am sorry, but Mr Findlay has no consistency of position on any of those issues. Patrick Harvie hit the nail on the head when he said that we have descended once again into binary politics. The central conceit of the Labour leader’s position and that espoused by her members is that somehow people on the SNP benches cannot possibly be sincere in our commitment to childcare or to addressing child poverty and that only members on the Labour benches can have a sincerely held position on those issues. Unfortunately, that misses the point. There is much social policy on which members on the two sets of benches could agree, were it not for the fact that the Labour Party has chosen its constitutional position as being more important than looking at the social agenda. The position of the Child Poverty Action Group, Unison and the Scottish Trades Union Congress is that the extension of free school meals will have a positive impact on the poverty agenda.

Not just yet. They make the point that “The universal approach has not only been shown to increase take up of healthy lunches and relief to family budgets but also to impact positively on children’s learning experience.” It has an impact on both the family budget and children’s educational attainment. While it trumpets its position on child poverty and ignores the fact that progress has been made by this Government, the Labour Party cannot ignore the recent report that showed that in 2009—before the Tories came to power—the UK was the fourth most unequal society in the developed world. After Unison Scotland published a statement urging the universal delivery of free school meals for P1 to P3, Jayne Baxter, the Labour Party spokesperson on children and young people, said on her Facebook page on 26 September 2013: “I think this is worth some serious consideration.” Unfortunately, it seems that her colleagues did not agree with her—she has been overruled in that regard. Malcolm Chisholm rose— I was just coming to Malcolm Chisholm. I have had great respect for Mr Chisholm ever since he resigned as a UK Government minister over Labour’s continuation of Tory welfare cuts. He makes the point that we need fiscal devolution in order to deliver what we are looking at, but even if fiscal devolution was on the table—and it is not—welfare policy would still be left in Westminster Government hands, and we all know where that leads. I happily give way to Mr Chisholm.

The difficulty I have with the position of Mr Chisholm and his colleagues is that they have said repeatedly that we need to get on and deliver the childcare proposals that are outlined in the white paper. That point was highlighted very well in Neil Bibby’s speech. At least Willie Rennie had the good sense to junk the speech that he was going to give and come to the chamber with a different speech. Even when it was explained to Mr Bibby, both in the First Minister’s opening comments and then in an intervention, how the money that is transferred from Westminster actually breaks down and that not all that money can be utilised for the purposes that Mr Bibby outlined, he said, “Oh, but you’ve got £300 million.” Imagine Mr Bibby at the end of the month: he looks at his bank account and says, “Fantastic! I’ve got all this money. I’ll go out and spend it,” and then he wonders why direct debits are suddenly coming off. We cannot use all that money for the purposes that Mr Bibby outlined for us. [Interruption.]

We then moved on to the Tory mantra from Alex Johnstone, who made an admirable, if nonetheless misguided, attempt to lionise Iain Duncan Smith. If Alex Johnstone looked at the comments in the press of those whom Iain Duncan Smith visited in Easterhouse, he would see that they stated that Iain Duncan Smith has betrayed them in the action that he has taken. If there was some kind of conversion on the road to Easterhouse, unfortunately Iain Duncan Smith forgot about it on the way back to London. I find the Tories’ position on poverty difficult, given that they are cutting income tax for the highest earners in society. Ruth Davidson rose— The Tory mantra appears to be that to make the rich more productive, they must be given more money, but to make the poor more productive, they must be given less. Is that Ms Davidson’s position?

The member should be aware—although her Scottish secretary is not—of the number of children who will be pushed into poverty as a result of the slash and burn welfare agenda that the Government of which she is a supporter is pursuing. The key to all this is the transformational childcare proposals that are contained in the white paper. To those members who have outlined their leap of faith in relation to further devolution, I say that the Scottish Government has a comprehensive white paper, whereas all that we have at the moment from the no parties is a blank sheet of white paper.

Will Drew Smith answer two simple questions: does he support the transformational changes envisaged in the white paper but within the devolution context, and, if he does, how does he propose to pay for them within that context?

Will the member give way?

It does not surprise me that one of the leading cheerleaders for the bedroom tax is opposed to money being used to mitigate the impacts of the bedroom tax. However, I take a different approach from that of Murdo Fraser and welcome the use of that money by Mr Swinney and the identification of those funds to help the most vulnerable, many of whom are among my constituents. I have a couple of observations to make. In his opening remarks, Mr Gray planted his and the Labour Party’s flags on the issues of the bedroom tax and childcare. He may want to pass a memo to his colleagues who speak on housing, health, local government, education and pretty much all portfolios, telling them that those are the Labour Party’s funding priorities. In every debate that we have in the chamber on all those portfolio issues, key Labour members and spokespeople demand additional revenue funding for those areas.

No. It is welcome that, at least, we now have distilled and clarified where the Labour Party’s priorities are. Furthermore, Mr Gray has been able to identify where he would get the money to fund childcare. I will come back to that in a moment.

No, thank you. Mr Gray is yet to give us a coherent understanding of where he would get the extra £30 million to top up the £20 million that the cabinet secretary has identified to deal with the bedroom tax, but I am sure that that will come in time. Malcolm Chisholm obviously has more faith in the UK Treasury than I have. His remarks and his quotation of Danny Alexander fall some way short of the guarantee that I would seek that the block grant will not be touched. He is right to say that how Mr Swinney chooses to spend the block grant is a matter for Mr Swinney. We need only look at the recent episode regarding public sector pensions, whereby the cabinet secretary was sent a letter from the Chief Secretary to the Treasury that made it clear in no uncertain terms that, if he pursued a different approach on public sector pensions, he would see the block grant reduced on a pound-for-pound basis. In that context, I have little faith in the UK Treasury when it comes to the flexibility that Malcolm Chisholm is looking for. Mr Chisholm claimed that the argument about where revenues from the childcare policy and the shift of people into work would go is a self-defeating one. The point is that if we use the revenues that the policy would generate to underpin, guarantee and fund that policy in the longer term, that is a critical element of the argument about the policy. We cannot deliver the one without having the other available to us to fund it. That is why the argument that the Deputy First Minister makes is critical to the debate. I sound a note of caution to the Labour Party on its enthusiasm for the use of consequentials. We must remember that the current consequentials exist in the budget for only the next two financial years. We also do not know what shifts may take place in the overall departmental expenditure limit budget over those two years. The point that I make to Mr Gray—it is simply a note of caution—is that suggesting that a long-term policy could be funded on the basis of non-guaranteed and not necessarily recurring revenue to the Scottish Government is fraught with difficulty.

No, it is not. We know that the Scottish Government is going to have money available to it in future years to fund what it proposes this year. What I am saying to Mr Gray is that the additional money from consequentials is additional only for the next two financial years—I am simply sounding a note of caution on that. I will conclude by touching on preventative spend. During the budget scrutiny process, I was a member of the Health and Sport Committee and we looked at preventative spend as part of our budget scrutiny. There are two key areas that would merit further examination, on which the cabinet secretary may be able to respond in his closing comments. The first of those is how preventative spend is being modelled and monitored by public bodies. The allied health professionals said that they feel that there is a lack of an evidence base in relation to their sectors, although the Royal College of Nursing highlighted work that is under way on a pan-UK level through the Office for Public Management. I would be interested to know from the cabinet secretary whether the Scottish Government has been able to feed into that or see the work that is being done. The second question, which relates to how we ensure that we get the best out of preventative spend, concerns the fact that the people who spend the money are not necessarily the people who derive the benefit from that spend. Sometimes, I feel that there can be a reluctance on the part of some public bodies to say that they will make significant preventative spending decisions because it might not be their area that would derive the benefit. For example, a preventative spend in education might deliver a significant future saving not in education but in criminal justice. We need to ensure that such issues are being borne in mind and that silo thinking does not creep into the preventative spending agenda.

An organisation in the constituency that I represent administers the landfill communities fund to a range of projects, some of which do not take place in communities adjacent to landfill. I ask Michael McMahon to clarify what would happen to the projects that that organisation funds, which are welcomed in my constituency, if his amendment was agreed to.

The cabinet secretary will be aware that those of us who represent Aberdeen have long argued for the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities to change its funding formula. He has previously indicated that he is willing to discuss such matters with COSLA. Has COSLA made any approaches to him in that regard?

Will the member outline to the chamber what impact he thinks his Government’s 20 per cent VAT rate has had on that hard-pressed retail sector?

Will the member give way?

Will Willie Rennie give way?

Will Neil Bibby give way?

The Barnett consequentials are for a two-year period. What does Mr Bibby suggest we do after those two years are up?

Some of the people who I represent would look on this debate and the glorification of the Osborne approach by Gavin Brown with a mixture of incredulity and bemusement, because for many of them the reality that he talks about is not the reality that they experience. During the Donside by-election, I noted with interest that, when the Conservatives campaigned, they stayed well away from the communities of Middlefield, Woodside, Printfield and Fersands—areas that are absolutely at the sharp end of Conservative welfare reforms—lest they actually had to see the impact of their policies on everyday people’s lives. I am interested that, during his speech, Gavin Brown talked about how good the chancellor’s budget will be for the retail sector and he then tried to suggest that all the pressures that the sector is facing are the fault of that nasty Mr Swinney and his policies in the Scottish Parliament, yet when I raised with him very real point about the 20 per cent VAT hike, on which there was no consultation with business, he skated over the prospect of that having any role in the real pressures that businesses are facing.

No, no. Businesses that I represent and talk to are certainly feeling the sharp end of that—particularly the smaller businesses, for whom the margins are tight. I will come back to small businesses later.

That is why I do not recognise the retail levy issue as being a wider concern among the people and businesses that I represent.

Not at this time. I thought that that have might been obvious from the fact that I did not let the member in. Mr Rennie spoke about the record number of people in work. That was interesting in that, while he was doing that, I remembered the Joseph Rowntree Foundation’s findings of just a few days ago. It stated that we now have more households who are in work and in poverty than households who are not in work and in poverty. This is the first time that that position has been recorded. That says to me that, while Mr Rennie lauds the fact that more people are in work, it is not simply the fact of being in work that gives people the opportunity to escape poverty. The UK Government is spectacularly failing to tackle in-work poverty, particularly the reliance of people who are in in-work poverty on benefits, by driving forward the better wage and employment standards that would allow people to escape in-work poverty. That would have the consequential impact of reducing the burden of the welfare budget that Mr Rennie and his colleagues are so keen to reduce. That would be a win-win. Perhaps Mr Rennie will tell us whether that would be a good thing.

Willie Rennie is very adept at praising his party’s role in the UK Government. He will know that independent analysis stated quite clearly that those tax changes were nullified by changes to the benefits system and other economic policies that are having a negative impact on those who are at the lowest end of the income scale. On the impact of the Liberal Democrats in Government, most of us have had a wee chuckle at Danny Alexander—the man who shares responsibility for the increase in the number of food banks—being pictured grinning at the opening of a food bank as if that is somehow a welcome measure. Indeed, Aberdeen has seen the launch of the Food Banks Partnership Aberdeen, which includes a range of organisations from my constituency such as the Middlefield community project, the Fersands and Fountain community work project, and the Printfield community project. Even in a wealthy city such as Aberdeen, more and more people have to rely on food banks. That is a direct consequence of the policies that are being pursued by Mr Rennie’s colleagues in coalition with the Conservatives. I want to talk about the small business bonus scheme. For all that Gavin Brown lauds the impact of his UK Government’s policies on the retail and business sectors, small businesses in my constituency praise the small business bonus scheme. During the Donside by-election, the cabinet secretary and I visited Audstar florist in Dyce. We met Audrey Ross, the owner of the business, and she said that thanks to the savings that she has accrued through the small business bonus, she has been able to invest in her business by buying a new vehicle, and to ensure that, during the tough times, her business was partially insulated from some of those impacts thanks to the measures that the Scottish Government has put in place.

I can indeed, Presiding Officer. There is a lot of talk among the Conservatives about relying on the OBR as some sort of independent, forward-thinking guru. If we look at the OBR’s record over the past few years—its predictions and the need for them to be revised—it is safe to say that the OBR is as good at predicting economic growth as Michael Fish was at predicting hurricanes.

Will Gavin Brown give way?

I have been both a participant in youth sport, as a member of my local athletics club when I was younger, and also a coach, having coached youth football prior to getting involved in elected politics as a councillor. One thing that needs to be emphasised, as Colin Keir pointed out strongly, is that although PE teachers are important—it was through my PE teacher at secondary school that I was put in contact with the local athletics club—there are many more people who have a role to play in driving the sport agenda. It is not just the PE teacher at the school who has the capacity to run one of the school sports teams or to get children inspired and involved in sport. That is something that is worth bearing in mind as we take the strategy forward. In my constituency—indeed, in the city of Aberdeen—we have a number of good sporting facilities. The Aberdeen Sports Village is a shining example of the Government’s commitment to delivering top-quality sporting facilities and it represents a strong investment in the city. Adjoining it is the Aberdeen aquatic centre, currently under development, which was brought forward by the council administration of which I was part. It provides a 50m pool for the city of Aberdeen that will allow for development and training for elite swimming clubs.

I suspect that I may be about to cover the point that Margo MacDonald is going to raise, so perhaps she will let me develop it and see whether it goes where she thinks it might. One of the key points is that those facilities are not just for elite sports people. Not everybody who gets involved with sport will be an elite sportsperson: not everybody who joins a football team is going to win a trophy and not everybody who joins an athletics club is going to win a medal or become a champion. It is important that we do not promote sport as being just about developing elite athletes for the future, but that we promote sport as something in which it is fundamentally good to get involved in and of itself.

I should have learned by now that it is always a mistake to try to second-guess Margo MacDonald, but I take the point that she makes. I recently visited Zariba, a synchronised skating club in Aberdeen that is currently Scottish and UK champion in synchronised skating. One of the pressures that its members face is the cost not just of entering competitions—they often have to travel internationally to compete—but of using the ice rink in Aberdeen. That is a point that I took up on their behalf and there has been some progress in that regard. I agree with Margo MacDonald because, having been involved in youth sport both as a participant and as a coach, I know that there are cost pressures for parents and for children—and for clubs as well. Some clubs are phenomenally successful at fundraising, gaining sponsorship and advancing in that respect, but other clubs struggle. Perhaps we need to look at that issue and consider how we can assist the clubs that do not have the easy ins to gaining sponsorship and access to private funding. They might be based in deprived communities and not have the benefit of parents who can afford the most up-to-date equipment for their children or pay fees to enable their children to participate. We perhaps need to look at such points going forward. However, I welcome the draft strategy and I am sure that it will be informed by the consultation.

I congratulate Rhoda Grant on bringing this important debate to the chamber. It has a personal note for me, as many of the children in my family spent time in neonatal care because of premature birth. In March this year, I attended the launch by the Friends of the Special Nursery at Aberdeen neonatal unit of the miracles and memories scrapbooks project, which aims to bring together pictures and stories from people and families who have experienced the care and support of the Aberdeen special nursery. One of the mothers, Julia Ann Roberts, commented to me that the neonatal care has led to a community spirit among the parents who have experienced prematurity and the care of the neonatal unit. Many of them are now dedicated fundraisers who work extremely hard to raise money to support the work of the special nursery. One of my constituents, Donna Scott, petitioned the Parliament on the subject of donor breast milk and the establishment of a donor milk bank to cover all of Scotland. I am delighted that she was successful in achieving that aim with the support of the Scottish Government and the national health service. We now have a system in which, regardless of geography, premature babies can access donor breast milk, which as we know is vital for many premature babies. Donna Scott and other parents who have been in contact with me have made a point about the number of beds that are available in units, particularly in Aberdeen. One point that has been brought to me frequently is about the number of mothers who have to be relocated to Ninewells in Dundee. They could not fault the care that they received there but, as Rhoda Grant highlighted, the geographical displacement causes obvious difficulties, particularly for the wider family, who want to visit and support the mother and child during what is a difficult time. Another interesting point is about parental leave, although I realise that that is not devolved to the Parliament. Many fathers have only two weeks of statutory leave, but if a child is in a neonatal unit for a number of weeks, that leave can often be eaten up during time when the child is not at home. The mother’s maternity leave is also eaten into by the time that the child spends in the neonatal unit. One of my constituents, Wendy Eastell, told me that, when her daughter was born prematurely at 27 weeks, she had 24 weeks of maternity leave. One week of that was spent in labour and 11 weeks were spent while her daughter was in the neonatal unit, which meant that she had only 12 weeks at home with her daughter before she had to return to work. At that point, her daughter was only term plus 11 weeks and weighed only five pounds. There can also be difficulties for mothers with breastfeeding and attachment if they do not have that vital time with their baby because it is spent largely in the neonatal unit. Presiding Officer, I have a couple of other constituent examples that I would like to raise, so I ask you to be a little flexible with my time so that I can at least put them on the record. A number of people have contacted me. I will not be able to raise all their points, but I have told them that I will send their comments to the minister after the debate. One example is my constituent Alison Martin, whose daughter Sawyer was born six weeks prematurely. Alison said that the staff at the neonatal unit in Aberdeen allowed her to be as hands-on as possible with the care of her daughter and that she cannot fault the care that the unit provided. One of the more harrowing cases that I have come across is that of my constituent Dani Rose Mackay, who was pregnant with twins and was taken in at 21 weeks with pre-term premature rupture of membranes, or PPROM. One of her twins had no water, but one did. A week later, the other twin had no water either. Both babies had heartbeats right up to labour at 25 weeks, but one of them, Lucy, had stopped growing. Her cord flow was bad and she did not cope with the labour, and her heartbeat stopped during it. Dani had been moved to Dundee at 24 weeks because Aberdeen had no room—a point that I raised earlier—but labour was stalled with steroids, magnesium and a contraction-stopping drug. At 25 weeks, she was found to be fully dilated, with her daughter Amie’s foot visible, and was induced. That failed, and 17 hours later Amie was born after surgery, although not a section. However, Dani’s cervix closed, so Lucy was induced and was stillborn, with waters intact, another seven hours later. Her waters had not ruptured, but had diminished due to placental issues. Dani felt that there was a disparity between the service that she was offered in Aberdeen and that in Dundee. Obviously, that predates the guidance that has been implemented, so I hope that it will perhaps change some of that. She said that she would love to see discharge packs being given to mothers when they leave the neonatal unit and more appointments being offered, which would enable mothers to chart the progress of their children. Perhaps having a dedicated outpatient department as the first port of call for mothers who have spent time in the neonatal unit could be looked at. I hope that I have been able to put some thoughts in the minister’s head. I thank Rhoda Grant for bringing the debate to the chamber.

This is an important debate. Like Willie Rennie, I have noted the change of tone since last year’s debate. It is a welcome change. It is always better when we work consensually on sensitive issues such as this one, rather than seeing individuals or parties making a cheap bid for headlines, which can often derail progress that is being made. It is welcome that that has not been prevalent today. I take on board the points that have been made about the fact that those who are at the sharp end of poverty and disadvantage often find themselves at the sharp end of drug misuse—that is absolutely correlated by figures—but, as Dennis Robertson said, the north-east has a particular problem around affluent drug use. Those people would not classify themselves as problem drug users but would probably consider themselves to be recreational drug users. We must also remember that there are circumstances that affect an individual beyond their income, such as abuse of a sexual or domestic nature, which does not confine itself to those in the lowest income brackets. We should not define how drug misuse can affect an individual solely by their income. Christian Allard gave an extremely powerful personal testimony and, in last year’s debate, I made the point that I could point to individuals in my school yearbook who had fallen into addiction—individuals who, to all intents and purposes, could be said to have had the same life chances that I had. We do not know what may have gone on in their private lives to affect the trajectory that their lives took. There is much to be welcomed. Other members have commented on the treatment statistics. In Aberdeen city, 99.5 per cent of people with drug and alcohol problems are being treated within three weeks, and nobody in Aberdeen is waiting more than six weeks for treatment. Those are extremely welcome statistics. Obviously, we want 100 per cent of those people to be treated within three weeks; nonetheless, having 100 per cent treated within six weeks is extremely positive. Although the number of drug deaths is a lot higher than we would want it to be, the number of drug deaths in the under-25 bracket is at its lowest level since records began. In Aberdeen, the number of drug deaths has reduced from 31 in 2010 to 16 in 2012, which is welcome progress. In addition, drug taking in the general population has fallen from 12.9 per cent in 2008 to 9.1 per cent in 2011 among 16 to 59-year-olds who self-report their drug use. Among young people, drug taking is at its lowest level in a decade, down from 23 per cent in 2002 to 11 per cent in 2010 according to the statistics that were published by ISD Scotland in December 2011. There are around 3,200 drug users in Aberdeen, and Drugs Action tells me that around 2,000 of them are currently accessing drug treatment. That means, however, that there are 1,200 drug users out there whom we need to reach and encourage to seek treatment. I imagine that some of them will fall into the category that I mentioned earlier. Drugs Action offers a range of services across the city, including a counselling service that is available to drug users, ex-users and family members. The point has been made that involving the family in an individual’s treatment is vital because they have a role to play in assisting that individual’s recovery. Specialist counselling is also available for people who are affected by HIV, people who have hepatitis B or C, female drug users, young people, the parents or other relatives of drug users and people who are drug free but who are affected by drug misuse through their extended family or friends. Drugs Action also offers city outreach services, with weekly drop-in advice, information and needle exchange sessions in my constituency at Mastrick, Northfield, Woodside and Middlefield. The Woodside outreach service has a dedicated worker for the Woodside area who operates two days a week at the Printfield Community Project and the Woodside Fountain centre. The outreach drugs worker offers individual counselling, support, advice and training to drug users, families, community groups and professionals in the Woodside area. There is a whole-community approach to recovery, which is important. There is also the Aberdeen recovery community, which is a partnership between Drugs Action and Aberdeen Foyer. It not only seeks to ensure that individuals recover but identifies skills and interests and tries to ensure that, when the individual has been treated, they have the opportunity to reintegrate into society through employment and the opportunities that arise from that. If the system receives an individual on the basis of their drug use but does not deal with the other factors affecting that individual, it can be said that the addiction has been treated but the person has not. We need to get to the stage at which the person is treated along with the factors that affect them. That is the concept of wraparound treatment that the Government is emphasising. I welcome the report and the progress that is being made. I also very much welcome the consensus that has arisen during the debate. If that consensus holds, we can continue to make extremely positive progress in the area.

This debate is about vision and the delivery of that vision. Yesterday, the Scottish Government outlined how independence will be delivered and how the powers of independence will be used by a Scottish Government that is led by the Scottish National Party. It is worth while to reflect on the journey to this point, not just since May 2011, but over many decades. Many committed activists worked exceptionally hard in times when the establishment of a devolved Parliament, let alone an independence referendum, was but a distant hope. They include people who had doors slammed in their faces during the days when the Scottish National Party did not command strong electoral support. This moment in history belongs to those on whose shoulders we stand, many of whom did not live to see this day.

I give way to the member on that point.

I will learn from my mistake and not give way again to the Labour leader when I am trying to make a serious point about the hard work of many people that has led us to this point. However, it is worth noting that Jim Sillars intends to vote yes in the referendum next year—unless I have picked him up wrongly—irrespective of the points that the Labour leader has made. From the moment that I became politically aware, I have thought that Scotland should be independent. My reasoning has evolved as I have grown older, and now that I am the parent of a disabled child I see the world through different eyes. I look to the two futures that are available to my son and to others like him. In the future that the union offers, he is regarded as a burden on the taxpayer and parties compete about who can subject vulnerable people to the harshest welfare regime. Indeed, only recently there was a headline in The Observer, which quoted Rachel Reeves, the Department for Work and Pensions spokesperson for the Labour Party, promising a welfare system that would be tougher than the one that the Tories are currently administering. I do not want a tough welfare system; I want a fair welfare system for the people of Scotland. The future that is on offer in the union is not the one that I want for my son or for any vulnerable citizen in Scotland. When I heard Johann Lamont speak on Radio 4’s “Any Questions?”, which was broadcast from Bearsden, something that she said struck a chord with me. She said that it was great that the Scottish Parliament had been delivered and was able to protect the national health service in Scotland from the reforms that are taking place south of the border. Was it not great, she said, that the NHS in Scotland was controlled in Scotland? However, when vulnerable people leave our hospitals and general practitioners’ surgeries and enter the clutches of Westminster welfare reform, Johann Lamont thinks that that is all right. She cannot make the logical step from having this Parliament protect health to having it control other forms of social protection. We can do better by our vulnerable citizens. The white paper says: “welfare is a ‘social investment’ ... designed ... to promote equality, fairness and social cohesion.” It goes on to say that welfare should be seen not just as a safety net but as “an opportunity for positive investment in people”, and sets out clear policy goals that the Government would pursue were the SNP to be elected, such as the abolition of the bedroom tax and the cancellation of universal credit and personal independence payments. Those are real choices that we can make if we have the powers that independence will afford us, to ensure that the same protection that is afforded to our vulnerable citizens through our Scotland-controlled health service is afforded to them through a Scotland-controlled welfare system. We will have an opportunity to recognise the value of all our people, through a system that values all our people and which truly delivers, from cradle to grave. The same can be said for our childcare policy. A point with which other parties seem to be having difficulty is that if we are to invest the sums that will be required to deliver transformational change, we need control of Scotland’s revenues. We do not require the system that Westminster currently operates, whereby we have an ever-diminishing block grant, which is subject to the whims of austerity-mad politicians at Westminster; we need the full power of Scotland’s resources if we are to deliver on a full range of powers for the people of Scotland. That is the essence of independence. It is about Scotland’s people controlling Scotland’s future, and Scotland’s Government delivering for Scotland’s people. It is about investment in bairns, not bombs. It is about attracting talented people to Scotland, not booting them out of Scotland. It is about protecting the vulnerable, not humiliating and degrading them. That is what independence is about. It is the step that we take as we say to the Scottish people, “We trust you”, and they in turn trust the people whom they elect to govern to take decisions for them. It is not a system in which decisions are taken on Scotland’s behalf by people who did not ask what Scotland wanted them to do. We need only look at the common agricultural policy decision to see in operation a system in which Government ministers and officials at Westminster take decisions on behalf of Scotland with nary a care for the impact on Scotland.

I absolutely can, Presiding Officer. With the powers that come with independence, we can, on behalf of the people of Scotland, take decisions that reflect the values of the people of Scotland. That is the society that I want for my children.

Will the member give way?

I appreciate that the member is entitled to her view on the issue, but does she accept that her views on Scotland’s place in the EU are rendered somewhat awkward because of the fact that her party is planning to hold a referendum on whether Scotland, as part of the UK, continues as a member of the EU?

Has the minister had any further discussions with the United Kingdom Government regarding its position on the European youth guarantee scheme, and whether the UK Government intends to continue to withhold access to the scheme from Scottish youngsters?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Next week, as members have alluded to, we will see the Scottish Government’s white paper. Unfortunately, this afternoon we appear to have seen Scottish Labour’s white flag. Today, Labour members have made it clear that their support for the Clyde shipyards is conditional on the constitutional arrangement. I wonder what those Clyde workers watching the debate at home are thinking today as Labour politicians queue up to write out the post-independence redundancy notices for the workers on the Clyde. Here today, Labour members have declared that, unless Scotland votes no, the Labour Party sees no future for the Clyde shipyards. What an utterly depressing way for the Labour Party to conduct itself in Scotland. During the debate, some have argued—Willie Rennie majored on this—that no UK warship has been built elsewhere. In what I thought was an excellent speech, Stewart Stevenson took Willie Rennie to task on the issue of sovereign capability, particularly in respect of fixed-wing aircraft. According to Hansard, speaking about the issue of the type 26 contract, the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Defence, Mr Gerald Howarth, said: “My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State has just returned from an extremely profitable visit to Malaysia, Australia, New Zealand and Turkey. All those countries have expressed interest in joining the United Kingdom in a collaborative programme”.—[Official Report, House of Commons, 31 January 2011; Vol 522, c 575.] That collaborative programme was to develop the type 26, so it is entirely conceivable that warships could be constructed outside the United Kingdom. The fact that it has not happened yet does not preclude such an opportunity in the future, as the under-secretary of state outlined.

I have a lot to get through, but I may come back to Mr Rennie in due course. Margo MacDonald made the important point that no less a man than Jimmy Reid—he was second to none in his commitment to Scottish shipbuilding; he was certainly not second to Ian Davidson MP—supported Scottish independence. The very notion that a man with such a strong commitment to the Scottish shipbuilding industry would support independence without thinking that the Scottish shipbuilding industry could see a prosperous and better future as part of an independent country demeans the work that Jimmy Reid did throughout his life. The conclusion that he came to was that independence is the best way for Scotland to go. We know that Ian Davidson MP is one to put out leaflets saying “Separation shuts shipyards”. We know that the better together campaign has put out leaflets claiming that shipyard jobs are more secure as part of the UK. However, as my colleague Jamie Hepburn pointed out, the decline in those jobs while Scotland has been part of the union suggests that it is the United Kingdom that shuts shipyards and presents insecurity as the future of the shipbuilding industry in Scotland. Like the better together campaign’s stories about losing the triple-A credit rating, that is yet another example of the reality belying the rhetoric. I will back the Clyde workers whatever the vote next September, but it is disappointing that so many Opposition MSPs have written off the future of the Clyde yards in the event of a yes vote. Have they no ambition, no vision, no willingness to consider a better future? Interestingly, Duncan McNeil spoke about those other small independent nations that have developed and allowed their shipbuilding industries to thrive. Can he not make the causal link between what has been happening to Scottish shipbuilding as part of the union and the ability of those countries to have control over their own futures and over their own industries? Can he not see that there may be a better future out there? Michael McMahon spoke of the industrial decline in central Scotland. I understand entirely the pain that is felt in those communities from that industrial decline, yet still the Labour Party wants to cling to the very political system that delivered that decline. As things currently stand at Westminster, that political system condemns Scotland to occasional rule by the Conservative Party even when the people of Scotland do not vote for that party. On James Kelly’s remark that we would be condemning England to perpetual Tory rule, the Labour Party would still have won the 1997, 2001 and 2005 general elections if all Scottish MPs had been removed from the equation. The idea that England never votes Labour is a myth perpetuated by Scottish Labour MSPs as a sort of faux solidarity argument. It has been argued that by removing Trident we would create economic insecurity. However, a 2007 report that was commissioned by the Scottish Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and the Scottish Trades Union Congress—among those who compiled the report was one Claudia Beamish, who is now an MSP but was at that time the chair of Scottish Labour—concluded: “Scotland would economically be a net loser from any decision to replace Trident. There would be serious consequences for its public services and for employment over a prolonged period of time.” Better together—ye couldnae make it up.

Will the member give way?

The member has just made my point, which is that churches are already able to choose who they marry.

Will Margaret Mitchell give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I had hoped to speak in the debate. Brian Adam, who was elected in 2011, is one of the people who ought to have been here with us today to press their voting buttons. I am sure that the cabinet secretary would want to record her wish that Brian were still with us today to be able to vote for the bill at 5 o’clock.

Does the minister agree that Lewis Macdonald should listen to the Labour leader of Aberdeen City Council, who has accepted the Scottish Government’s timescale for the project, and that when Lewis Macdonald was the minister with responsibility for transport in the Scottish Executive he did nothing to advance the Haudagain roundabout?

Does the member share my disappointment that, when the SNP group on Aberdeen City Council proposed a publicly funded bus company in the city of Aberdeen, the Labour-led administration rejected that out of hand?

Why, if Labour is serious about reforming public transport, did James Kelly’s Labour colleagues in Aberdeen vote down the possibility of a publicly owned bus company in the city, building on the model of Lothian Buses, which could have been delivered without the need for any change to legislation?

I congratulate my friend and colleague Dennis Robertson on securing the debate and on bringing this important issue to the chamber. Dennis has been an extremely strong campaigner on the issue and related topics since he entered the Parliament and it is fantastic that he is again bringing the issue to the Parliament’s attention. I am interested in the comments on media perception. In doing a bit of googling ahead of the debate, I ended up on the Daily Mail website, looking at an article that was trying to make out that size 16 models are not different from the norm. Unfortunately, the sidebar contained links to other articles saying things such as, “Wow! Look at Helena Christensen’s fantastic bikini body,” or, “Look at the weight that Kim Kardashian has lost since she had her baby.” In essence, that completely and utterly nullified the message of the article. We should bear it in mind that the media has an important role in relation to its enforcement of body stereotypes. I want to talk about the way in which mannequins, body size and body perception issues affect men. The charity Beat has argued that male eating disorders in the fashion industry are increasing because of a shift in emphasis from muscular men to slender and skinny men. Beat says that it has seen a rise in the number of men with eating disorders and it is trying to draw attention to that. I was interested in Jackie Baillie’s remarks on the evolution of the mannequin. The company Rootstein has attracted controversy lately with its new mannequin, homme nouveau, which sports a 35-inch chest and a 27-inch waist. In 1967, the Rootstein classic mannequin had a 42-inch chest and 33-inch waist; in 1983, the mannequin that was referred to as the muscleman had a 41-inch chest and a 31-inch waist; and, in 1994, the mannequin that was known as the swimmer had a 38-inch chest and a 28-inch waist. Now, the company has gone to a 35-inch chest and a 27-inch waist. It is depressing that such companies do not see the impact that those changes have on society. From my perspective, when I started to put on weight towards the end of my teens, I stopped wearing jeans because I had the perception that jeans were what skinny people wore and that they would not suit somebody who had put on a lot of weight. There is that perception out there. Jackie Baillie also made an interesting point about Barbie. Likewise, a body perception is passed across through the dimensions of male action figures. “Evolving Ideals of Male Body Image as Seen through Action Toys”, an article by professors at Harvard University medical school, McLean Hospital and the University of Massachusetts Boston, reviewed physiques of male action toys such as GI Joe, or Han Solo and Luke Skywalker from “Star Wars”. The review found that the figures have become more muscular over time, with many contemporary figures far exceeding the muscularity of even the largest human bodybuilders. Those toys can lead to perceptions. Beat makes the point that, although images and mannequins alone do not cause eating disorders, they reinforce perceptions and stereotypes. An individual’s negative perception is reinforced if their body image is not reflected in the mainstream media or in the supermarkets that they shop in. In tackling the issue, it is important that we do not say that by having size 16 mannequins we will prevent people from developing eating disorders—the logic is not as simple as that. However, if we move to a situation in which people see their size represented in the media and on the high street, that will remove some of the negative perception and the isolation that those who have an eating disorder can feel. I will finish with a quotation from one of the case studies on the Beat website. One person says: “I just wish that being a size 14 was considered as beautiful as a size 8.” The message that we should send out is that, regardless of your size, you are beautiful.

I take on board what the member is saying, but as he will know there have always been and will always be individual examples of people whose care does not meet the high standards that we expect. Does the member accept that, in the 2012 in-patient experience survey, 93 per cent of patients responded that they were treated with care and 92 per cent responded that they were treated with respect?

We have heard much about what person-centred healthcare and support are. A 2011 Joseph Rowntree Foundation report entitled “Transforming social care: sustaining person-centred support” has been highlighted to me. It took a bit of time to discuss with participants how they would define “person-centred support”. The terms that were put forward as key components of that included: “putting the person at the centre, rather than fitting them into services ... treating service users as individuals ... ensuring choice and control for service users ... setting goals with them for support ... emphasising the importance of the relationship between service users and practitioners ... listening to service users and acting on what they say ... providing up to date, accessible information about appropriate services ... flexibility; and ... a positive approach, which highlights what service users might be able to do, not what they cannot do.” I think we would all accept that most of those things are important in developing a person-centred approach. It was interesting to read the quotation at the start of the report from one of the practitioners involved. They said: “It’s not another job, it’s the job. Person-centred support is not another thing that you have got to do, it is what you have got to do.” I am sure that that message is getting across from the direction that is being given from the Government and in the work that health professionals are doing to ensure that person-centred support is paramount. Another report that was highlighted to me is from the University of Stirling and is entitled “Person Centred Care: what is it and how can it be improved?”. It looks at two guiding principles of person centred care: “each individual feels they have been recognised and responded to as: a. a unique human being with intrinsic value, and a personal identity, life story and life plans that matter but that may be vulnerable in health care contexts; and b. an individual with a capability for developing and exercising autonomy that matters but that is vulnerable in social contexts, including healthcare.” It is about recognising the individual at the heart of the process and ensuring that things are worked with the individual, rather than the individual being worked with the process. I take on board the points that Mr Findlay raised, but he must accept that we have made progress on accident and emergency waiting times, although perhaps not to the extent that we would want. When we came into government, 87.5 per cent of patients were waiting for less than four hours and there has been a significant improvement in the number of waits of less than four hours since then. I am sure that Mr Findlay will at least be gracious enough to acknowledge that.

It is good to see that Mr Findlay does not accept the progress that the Government has been making on accident and emergency waiting times. During Mr Findlay’s speech, when I quoted from the national in-patient experience survey—I will quote some figures from it again—in support of a point that I was making to him, which he seemed to be amused by when Fiona McLeod reiterated it, Mr Findlay said that it is all well and good to quote surveys but he wants to quote the people who come to see him at his surgery. I get people coming to see me at my surgery—as, I am sure, every MSP does—to tell me about their individual experiences of the health service. The problem is that people come to us if they have an issue that needs to be resolved, so the people who have had a fantastic experience in the health service generally do not turn up at our surgeries to tell us that. However, that is not in any way to denigrate or undermine those people who have had an unsatisfactory experience in the health service. It is important that we do all that we can to ensure that everybody has a fantastic experience in the health service, but we must accept that that will never be possible for every person who goes through the health service. It is a human organisation and all human organisations are fallible. There will be occasions on which an individual does not have the experience that they would want or that we would want them to have, and it is important that lessons are learned from those experiences and applied to ensure that the experiences are not repeated in the future. That is what we must do in dealing with such issues with the health service.

Dr Simpson makes an interesting point that I am sure the cabinet secretary and the minister will take on board. I cannot make a commitment on their behalf—well, I could but I do not think that they would thank me for it. It is good to see Dr Simpson back in the chamber. [Applause.] I have missed his contributions at the Health and Sport Committee, and I welcome him back. I quoted the national survey figures for “I was treated with care” and “I was treated with respect”, which were 93 and 92 per cent respectively. In addition, 95 per cent of people responded positively on “I had privacy when being examined and treated”, and “The main ward or room I stayed in was clean” received a 93 per cent positive response. The general consensus out there is that there is a positive response from patients regarding their experience with the health service. However, that is not to say that we should not always strive to improve, and that is what we do. The motion talks about making GP services “more accessible for patients”. I will talk about a local example in my constituency, the Danestone patient participation group. I met the group at the Danestone gala in the summer, where it was involved with the Danestone medical practice stall. Essentially, the group is a sounding board and a forum for patient involvement in the GP practice. Members of the group discuss improvements that would help to make patients’ experience of the practice better. In addition, the group can be asked for its thoughts on the coming into operation of new legislation that would concern patients. It has recently hosted evening meetings on topics such as asthma, men’s health and diabetes, for which it has brought in affected patients from the practice. Recently, it held a seminar that was entitled, “Thinking ahead: preparing for winter”, for which it brought in elderly members of the community and talked to them about how they could make appropriate preparations, for example by reducing the risk of slips or falls on their paths. The local police and doctors from the practice were also brought in to participate in the discussion. The approach that is being taken in Danestone is interesting, and I am aware that it is being taken by other GP practices across Scotland. The cabinet secretary might want to consider applying the approach more widely and introducing such groups in other areas to ensure that the GP practice is not just the place where people turn up when they are sick, but a place where people feel that they have an involvement in developments and in helping the practice to improve in a way that patients would want to see. I leave that on the table for the cabinet secretary to consider. I would be happy to discuss it with him and the minister after the debate if they would like to find out more.

Does the minister take a view on the prevalence of “No ball games” signs in many areas, which often act as a deterrent to outdoor play for children and which, in many cases, should now be removed?

On 7 August, part of the city centre of Aberdeen was essentially turned into a playground, with 250 to 300 children participating in the Aberdeen national play day, which included face painting, an obstacle course and a bouncy castle. It was organised by the Aberdeen play forum, whose role is to increase play opportunities in Aberdeen, working with public and private organisations in the city and with charities and voluntary and community organisations to raise awareness of the importance of play. That kind of approach ties in neatly with the strategy that the minister has launched, which I welcome greatly. I think back to my time as a councillor when work was undertaken in my ward to reinvigorate some of the play areas in the community—one at Sluie park in Dyce and two in the Princess Drive area of Dyce—which had fallen into disrepair and were not well used. In one case it was about bringing partners and funding together to put new equipment in place and to change the layout of the park and make it much more vibrant and well used. In the other case, it was about bringing in some street art on the ground, which reinvigorated the area and has made it very well used by the young children round about. There are other areas in my constituency where there is a lack of modern play facilities. In some cases, such as in Forrit Brae and Bucksburn, play facilities have been removed with no prospect of them being replaced. I take on board the point that members have made about the funding issues, which I recognise, because I encountered them when I was working as a councillor to reinvigorate some of the play areas. We need to think outside the box, if you will, about how we approach this. We cannot simply say, “There’s not enough funding in local authority budgets, so we can’t make progress.” We need to find creative ways to encourage new play facilities and play areas to be developed. One of those might be to look to the private sector and to consider whether, in the same way that some local authorities have sponsorship of roundabouts, sponsorship of play parks could fund play facilities. We also need to consider the prohibitive cost of play equipment. We need to look at whether the companies that are supplying play equipment are offering true value for money and whether they are asking the price that ought to be paid for such equipment. Ken Macintosh’s anecdote about the Wendy house reminded me that children sometimes do not need expensive play equipment—imagination is all that is required. In my intervention on “No ball games” signs, I was trying to make the point that we sometimes do our level best to prevent play from happening in certain areas. However, when I was growing up “No ball games” signs were very good for goalposts. We need to think about how we are encouraging children to use open spaces. I will focus the remainder of my speech on the issue of children with disabilities and additional support needs. The Conservative amendment is a welcome addition that enhances and strengthens the motion. Here are some testimonials from families who have difficulty in accessing leisure and play facilities: “There isn’t anything suitable for our young daughter with autism”; “No afterschool clubs or groups to cater for his needs”; “There is nowhere for him due to age and height restrictions”; “Physical access. 1:1 support needed—can’t do that with another child to support, physically too difficult”; and “It is very stressful for our son and us as he doesn’t do well in crowded places”. I recognise those as issues that I have encountered when looking at the play opportunities for my own son. The facilities that people would like to see are: “Sensory rooms and more soft play for ASN”; “Relaxation, play and learn, movement, ball, storytelling”; and “To have somewhere to access as a family or with your child with ASN; to have somewhere we could go as a family”. In the north-east—not necessarily in my constituency—there are opportunities for families with additional support needs. Kool Kidz, in Insch, is a soft play centre that tries to hold special requirement sessions on a monthly basis—the next one is on 20 November. I have been to one of those sessions and they are extremely welcome. Hoodles, in Oldmeldrum, is one of the top soft play areas according to a Netmums survey. It holds a special requirement session on the last Thursday of every month, which runs from 5.30 to 8 pm. Today, for Hallowe’en, there are prizes for the best boy and girl in fancy dress. There are good examples of organisations and private enterprises that are reaching out to make their areas more accessible to children with additional support needs. It can be difficult for families with children with additional support needs to access such facilities when they are open to the main stream, as they can be very busy and crowded. If a child has particular sensory issues or a lack of ability to understand the concept of waiting and taking turns, or if a child wants to use only the middle one of three slides, it can be difficult to explain that to other children and parents. There is a facility in the north-east—in Westhill, in Dennis Robertson’s constituency—called SensationALL, which is designed specifically to cater for children with additional support needs. It has sensory provision, toys and other opportunities for sensory play, and at present it is fundraising to increase the availability of its play facilities. I will end by quoting Dr Seuss because, frankly, any opportunity to do so should be taken: Oh, the places you’ll go! There is fun to be done! There are points to be scored. There are games to be won. And the magical things you can do with that ball will make you the winning-est winner of all. By having a national play strategy, we can make Scotland’s children the winning-est winners of all.

I appreciate the point that the member is making, but he will recognise that finite resources are available. The point that I made in my speech is that we need to look at ways of co-operating beyond the public sector. For example, we could consider sponsorship of play parks and equipment. We also need to look very carefully at the amount of money that is being charged by some of the companies that provide play equipment, particularly specialised play equipment. Such equipment for children with disabilities, for example, can often be prohibitively expensive.

Members have covered how we got to where we are with the landfill tax being devolved to the Scottish Parliament, which emphasises the fact that we in Scotland and in the Scottish Parliament are able to administer taxation and deal with the responsibilities that come with that. I want to focus on some of the issues that have been highlighted during the debate, the first of which is the block grant adjustment. As I was not party to the committee evidence sessions, I have listened closely to what has been said in the debate about the notion that the block grant adjustment would be based on OBR projections, and I have some concerns because the OBR projections and forecasts on things like economic growth and oil revenues generally tend not to be recognised as being realistic. In March 2012, the OBR estimated that in 2014-15, landfill tax income would be £145 million, in 2015-16 it would be £151 million, and in 2016-17 it would be £157 million. By December of the same year, the OBR had reduced the figures to £105 million, £107 million and £107 million respectively. By March 2013, just 12 months after the first figures were published, the OBR reduced them again to £104 million, £105 million and £105 million. Those are quite significant adjustments to be made in 12 months. If it turned out that the projections did not match up to reality and it transpired that the OBR had underestimated or overestimated the figures at any stage, that would have implications for the block grant adjustment and potential future clawback. It is therefore important to ensure that the sums add up, so I would welcome the cabinet secretary’s views on how he sees the role of the OBR projections and whether there is a better way of looking at those in future years. The bill is important not just because of its revenue implications but because it is a tax that is clearly linked to environmental sustainability. It is, essentially, designed as a deterrent to landfill and an encouragement to consider alternative means of waste disposal that will reduce the landfill tax burden on public bodies and organisations. We should not be afraid to administer the landfill tax in that way, which is why I was interested in Gavin Brown’s point about the rate at which the tax is to be levied. I caution against entering into any kind of taxation competition over the rate at which landfill tax is levied. I also do not buy the argument about waste tourism. Rob Gibson summed up the point appropriately when he said that, even within Scotland, many authorities have significant distances to travel to dispose of waste to landfill, so the notion that local authorities or organisations will send trucks across the border to dispose of waste to landfill for a marginal saving on the tax, which would soon be gobbled up by the associated transportation costs, does not really bear scrutiny.

Mr Brown has that twinkle in his eye, so he clearly has a clever point to make. I will allow him to make it.

I say to Mr Brown that I do not think that that argument would stand up to scrutiny based on what Mr Gibson has said. If you were simply going from one part of the border to another part of the border, I do not think that that would be an economic way in which to dispose of waste. We will agree to disagree on that. On the landfill communities fund, prior to being elected to Parliament in 2011, I served as the chair of an organisation called Aberdeen Greenspace Trust Ltd, which administered landfill community funding through grant aid and delivery of environmental projects. I welcome the fact that, in his evidence to the Finance Committee on 19 June, the cabinet secretary stated that at present, Scotland gets less in terms of landfill tax receipts than would be expected—landfill tax receipts from Scotland make up 9.2 per cent of the total UK pot, but only 7 per cent of landfill communities fund spending has been contributed to projects in Scotland. The administering of a landfill communities fund in Scotland gives us the opportunity to address that imbalance. It is interesting as well to consider, when we come to the establishment of a landfill communities fund in Scotland, the need to ensure that although it will be done through subordinate legislation, organisations such as Aberdeen Greenspace in my constituency could feed in their thoughts on how the fund might operate and how it might operate differently to the way in which the current UK fund is administered through Entrust. I would welcome an opportunity to have that dialogue outside the debate. On the 10-mile radius, I take on board Michael McMahon’s point. My experience, through working with Aberdeen Greenspace, was slightly different, in that there were often opportunities to expand the work that was being done through the landfill community fund to which the 10-mile radius proved to be a barrier. We have to accept and recognise that environmental sustainability does not always have to be geographically constrained. The broadening out of the ability to use the money for other projects would perhaps have a knock-on effect on landfill and so might indirectly benefit communities that find themselves adjacent to landfill. Some such communities are just on the border of my constituency as well, so I think that the 10-mile radius needs to be examined because there are opportunities that would be restricted if we were to retain it.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with Aberdeen City Council regarding the timescale for improvements to the Haudagain roundabout. (S4O-02498)

I note from the coverage that the city council has agreed to follow the Scottish Government’s timescale, which will be welcomed by my constituents in Middlefield, who were concerned about the impact on them of the council’s proposed two-year timescale. Is the minister aware of comments by Councillor Willie Young, convener of finance at Aberdeen City Council, who has threatened to withdraw the council from the project and remove it from the regeneration of Middlefield unless he receives what he describes as a written contract on the Haudagain roundabout? Does that reflect the minister’s discussions with Barney Crockett?

Will the member take an intervention?

I pay tribute to the petitioners who came to the Public Petitions Committee to raise their concerns in Parliament. I have played quite a unique role in the process, as I was a member of that committee when the petitions were lodged. I then became a member of the Health and Sport Committee when it was undertaking its inquiry into the issue, so I have been involved from the beginning in the parliamentary process, although I missed the writing of the report due to being engaged in a by-election up in Aberdeen. The point is that the process has demonstrated a concern being brought to Parliament and being given the serious treatment that it requires. I want to consider the issues around rare diseases and orphan conditions, following on from Ken Macintosh’s points. I admit that I was familiar with the issues prior to the petitions being lodged, but I would not previously have professed to know as much as I have since learned about rare diseases and orphan conditions. In the Routledge report, the recommendation was made that the SMC “should develop a policy specifically relating to ultra-orphan medicines to guide the process of consideration of all available evidence”. That is one of the difficulties that has been faced in relation to ultra-orphan medicines. The fact is that there is a very small patient cohort not necessarily just in Scotland, or just the United Kingdom, but sometimes pan-Europe; we are talking about a very small number of people. It can therefore be difficult to ensure that there are robust trial data for medicines. Also—and most crucially, in terms of some of the points that have been raised—there is an issue around affordability, within QALY, of the medicines that are available for ultra-orphan conditions. That is why I welcome Professor Routledge’s further recommendation about having a temporary pause in the appraisal process. The Scottish Government has accepted that recommendation and it is one that the Health and Sport Committee welcomed in its report, saying that “such a pause could also create an opportunity for discussion on, for example, whether there was scope to develop a reimbursement rate which could into account various factors such as supplying post licensing data or assessed benefit of medicines post approval.” To me, the moves around the threshold of QALY and around the pause in the process create what could be described as a double-lock opportunity, in that those moves allow for much wider consideration of medicines that previously would simply not have been considered. Also, they allow for further discussion of medicines that are still not captured by that process, in order to allow them to be so captured. That is encouraging. I am sure that members will be aware of the AllTrials campaign: it has been running for a significant time and has a number of high-profile supporters. It seeks to ensure that trial data that are made available at the point at which drugs are submitted for approval are as transparent and robust as possible. I believe that, as well as there being role for the SMC, and a role for the decision-making process, there is a role for the pharmaceutical industry. Eric Low, the chief executive of Myeloma UK, has said that he is “very encouraged that the SMC will be given additional resources and a revised remit so that they can further build on and evolve their already excellent appraisal processes.” However, he goes on to say that “it is critically important that while improvements to access to medicines are made we also ensure that we are getting genuine value for money, and that the pharmaceutical industry improves the type and quality of information it provides to get their medicines funded on the NHS. I strongly believe that the SMC are best placed to help make this happen.” There is an issue about pharmaceutical companies fulfilling their role not just on transparency but on affordability, because we cannot escape the fact that we live in a world of finite resource within the health service. It is therefore imperative that the drugs companies show willing to come to the table and negotiate on prices. That point was reflected in a lot of the evidence that the committee received during its deliberations. The SMC investment is very welcome. We need to make the SMC process not just more transparent, but more publicly accessible. It is one thing to publish the findings of the SMC, but to the individual on the street—indeed, even to the MSP—a lot of decisions are published that are very difficult to translate. Making that information more publicly accessible and explaining it to the public would be helpful. All too often we read stories about drugs that have not been approved, but we do not always see or understand the reasons that lie behind the decisions, so making that information more accessible would be beneficial. I am not sure whether the cabinet secretary has been made aware of it, but the MS Society has raised a number of questions. My colleague, George Adam, who has a strong link to the MS Society, asked me to bring them to the debate, to which I agreed. I will forward the briefing to the cabinet secretary so that he can reply more fully. The questions are about the timescale for introducing value-based assessment. The crux of the MS Society’s concern is the Scottish Government’s plan to involve stakeholders in developing the reforms. I suspect that the crux of the concerns of many other organisations would be how stakeholder organisations will feed into the reform process and feel fully involved. A point that has been raised repeatedly is that we should, as well as making the process being more transparent and open, ensure that organisations and individuals who have a concern or an interest can feed in their views and have them taken into account. Perhaps the cabinet secretary will take a moment in his closing remarks to reflect on that.

I appreciate what the member says and believe that she and I would be in agreement on a lot of things. However, how does she square that circle with her desire and her party’s desire for those same low-income families to pay more in council tax?

The member will also be aware that the Institute for Fiscal Studies did an analysis of the UK Government budget across the board and it showed that the tax changes were in many cases cancelled out, and in some cases negatively so, by the benefits changes that are being pursued.

Will the member give way?

Will Patrick Harvie give way?

I simply say to Mr Macintosh that, given that he lost the finance brief on the basis that he went against the rhetoric of his leader and supported our social wage policies, perhaps he should join us.

I was not expecting to be called so quickly. I will try to get through my speech in four and a half minutes. In his report “Constitutional change and inequality in Scotland”, Professor David Bell noted that “raising Council Taxes actually raises inequality”. We have it there that the council tax freeze is helping the people who are at the lower end, because the proportion of their income that they spend on council tax is greater than the proportion that those at the higher end of the income scale spend. The council tax freeze prevents people who are at the lower end from facing a greater burden as a result of rising council taxes, which benefits them. I was interested in Ken Macintosh’s point about community ownership of renewables, on which we probably find common cause. When I was a list MSP, I visited the community wind turbine in the parish of Udny, which is just outside Aberdeen. That turbine is being used to generate income for the community, which is being distributed via local groups. Community renewables can also be used in other ways—for example, to reduce energy costs rather than to generate income. That needs to be looked at. Good work is being done on community renewables, but we might need to look at how to expand that. I represent a constituency in a city that is, on the face of it, very wealthy. Aberdeen has a high employment rate, a low unemployment rate and a low long-term unemployment rate. However, that masks some of the poverty in the city. Members who came to campaign in the Donside by-election will be aware of some of the deprived communities in my constituency. Those areas feel the sharp end of some of the cost-of-living issues that we are discussing. Good work is done in my constituency by a range of organisations that are dedicating effort to assisting people who are at the sharp end. For example, Woodside learning centre hosts a mini-market that prices goods at an affordable rate for people in the community, who can shop there rather than use the supermarkets, where many goods are priced out of their reach. The Printfield Community Project has a charity shop in which no items are priced and people are asked what they can afford to pay rather than priced out of purchasing items. Such approaches are helping my constituents in difficult times. I cannot help but think that we would be better served if we looked carefully at cause and effect. The point was rightly made that—as Jackie Baillie highlighted in her speech—the genesis of the problems that have been identified as affecting people in Scotland is in policy decisions that are made south of the border in reserved areas. We can take at face value the points that Labour members make—I do not doubt for one second that members like Kezia Dugdale are passionate about the issues that they bring to the chamber—but what gets my goat is the notion that the Labour Party somehow has a monopoly on compassion and that SNP members are a bunch of uncaring, soulless individuals who focus only on the referendum. I have made the point several times that I am not in this just to get powers for Scotland and say, “Job done.” I am in this to get powers for Scotland and to use them to shape a fairer and more equal society for the people who live here. That is what the referendum is about.

No—I have only 45 seconds left. Labour members say that we are “putting Scotland on pause” and that we are telling people to wait until after 2014. However, the Labour Party essentially says that people will have to put up with the Tories until 2015 and then cross their fingers and hope not only that it gets its act together as a Westminster party and gets into power, but that it does what it has said it would do. I hope that we have learned our lesson from 1997, when the first thing the Labour Party did when it inherited power was to continue Tory spending policies and Tory benefit cuts. I see Malcolm Chisholm in the chamber; he resigned as a minister because the Labour Government of 1997 continued the benefit cuts that the Conservatives envisaged. We should have learned our lesson from 1997; the Labour Party will tell the people of Scotland that all would be fixed by a Labour Government, but all that we have seen in evidence is the opposite.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I congratulate my friend and colleague Aileen McLeod on bringing this debate to the chamber. Aileen’s personal testimony serves to remind us that many members have experience of issues beyond our comprehension. It took a great deal of courage for Aileen to relate her personal experiences in Parliament and I thank her very much for doing that. I could not begin to imagine the circumstances undergone by somebody who was diagnosed with cancer at such an early age. It is a great credit to her that she is using the opportunity that she has as a member of the Parliament to raise awareness and to bring this debate to the chamber. I also thank the Teenage Cancer Trust for its briefing in advance of this debate and I thank Amy Quinn for her letter. It cannot have been easy for her to relive the experience and write it out for members of this Parliament to read. I read it and I was struck by its content. Although detecting cancer as early as possible is obviously a healthcare issue, I have identified an attitudinal issue in the briefing and in Amy’s letter. We need to look at how seriously we take young people when they present with health problems and ensure that they are not dismissed as readily as Amy’s fears about her health were. All too often in society, we do not listen enough to young people when they talk about their problems. We need to do that. When it comes to the wider attitudinal agenda, I absolutely agree that we need to raise awareness of the issue. I note from the briefing that “Cancer is the most common cause of non-accidental death in young people, and five-year survival rates remain lower in teenagers than in children. While cancer in this age group is rare, it’s vital for young people to know the common signs so they can seek medical advice if they are worried.” It is not just a case of educating young people by talking to them; it is also about getting young people to be more open to talking about the issue among themselves. It strikes me that there is a parallel with the conversations that we have had about mental health, in that it is not a comfortable subject for people to talk about; it is not the sort of thing that they talk about at the dinner table or among their peers and friends. If we make people comfortable enough to open up about it, to discuss it and to help one another through difficulties by spotting the signs, we can save lives. The work that the trust is doing, which I read about in its briefing, is fantastic. We should look at how we can replicate that work across Scotland. I am aware from conversations that my office had with the trust that it has not yet expanded its services into the Aberdeen area. I look forward to having a discussion with the trust about whether it has plans to do so in future, and about what MSPs who represent communities where it does not yet have a reach can do to take its message to health boards and health professionals. I would be happy to have such a discussion, perhaps at the reception, if I am able to attend it. I commend Aileen McLeod for bringing the issue to the chamber. If, as a society, we can become more open in discussing issues to do with cancer—particularly as it affects young people—I think that that will go some way to resolving some of the issues that the trust has identified.

I apologise because I might not be able to remain in the chamber until the end of the debate. I have constituents visiting Parliament today and the arrangements were made well in advance of me knowing that this members’ business debate would take place. I congratulate Richard Baker on securing the debate. I will focus on helicopter safety, although I will refer to his comments about the fatal accident inquiry. The heliport and helicopter operators are based in Dyce in my constituency. Having grown up in Dyce, I am very familiar with the movements of helicopters and helicopter noise. Indeed, I have developed something of an immunity to the noise that helicopters make. However, it was interesting to hear the stark silence that pervaded the area when the helicopter flights were grounded, and the lack of helicopter movements around the community was noticeable. Many of my constituents, family and friends are directly or indirectly involved in the offshore industry and the flights. I have heard many tales of family members such as partners and children being deeply concerned for the safety of those whom they love having to be transported by helicopter to the rigs. I have spoken to a number of individuals who have said that, although we obviously have to look at the overall safety record of the helicopters, they are concerned about the number of incidents that have taken place during a fairly short period of time. In my question to the cabinet secretary following his statement, I mentioned that I had attended school with one of the victims of the 2009 fatal accident. Stuart Wood was in the year below me at Dyce academy, and I notice that his mother has recently commented in the press about the delays to the fatal accident inquiry. We all wish to place on the record our desire to see that fatal accident inquiry take place as soon as possible to ensure that some of the questions that the victims’ families have can be addressed. We need to look at the context of what is happening with helicopter safety. I am sure that this week’s announcements were not prompted by Richard Baker’s members’ business debate today, but they have taken precedence during the past few days. Announcements have been made about the CAA review, and I welcome the fact that the Norwegian Civil Aviation Authority will be involved in that review because, as we understand it, the Norwegian safety record is somewhat better than that of the UK. It is very welcome that the Norwegian CAA’s head of helicopter safety will be working very closely with us on that review. There have been recent reports that the seating configuration on Super Puma helicopters will be looked at. That issue was raised during meetings that I and other MSPs had with Eurocopter and it, too, needs to be factored into the review. Yesterday’s announcement from three other operators that they are to launch their own reviews and are calling for other helicopter operators to become involved in that review bears witness to the fact that a lot of work is being done at the moment. I am not necessarily 100 per cent in agreement with Richard Baker, because the landscape of review and inquiry could become cluttered. There is a point at which we must ask where we step back and allow some of the work that is being done to take place so that the lessons from that work can be applied to any future inquiry or review, rather than running parallel inquiries and running the risk of missing some of those lessons. That is the area in which I would say that I am not necessarily 100 per cent in agreement with Mr Baker.

In line with most of this afternoon’s speeches, mine will begin with my declaring an interest in that I have played golf—and I will probably leave it at that. Suffice it to say that from here on in I will be sticking to crazy putting with my children. Nevertheless, I am a great fan of golf and the Ryder cup. Even many of those who do not enjoy watching golf find the excitement that it generates to be infectious. I note the comments that have been made about the victory at Medinah in 2012; for those who recall the match at Brookline in 1999, I note that it was good to see Europe doing the reverse at Medinah and coming back from a seemingly irreversible deficit on the final day against all the odds. What was particularly sweet was that the victory was secured by one of Europe’s more out-of-form players, Martin Kaymer; indeed, one of the beauties of the Ryder cup is that it often makes heroes out of players whose form up to that point might well have been patchy and who might not have been performing well in regular tournament play. The Ryder cup is going to bring a lot of golf fans to Scotland in 2014. Obviously a lot of people in Scotland will attend the tournament but a lot of people from Europe and the US will be coming to watch and cheer on their respective teams. In that respect, there are obvious links not just to the wider tourism agenda that members have referred to but to the golf tourism agenda in particular; after all, many of these people will be keen golfers as well as golf fans and will be visiting not just for the duration of the Ryder cup but for one, two or even three weeks, depending on their schedules. As a result, we must promote the very best golf courses that are available. I appreciate that some might not want to play just the elite courses and, indeed, the elite courses are not always the best ones to play on. There are also very good municipal courses that are worth highlighting. I want to focus on one course in particular—and I am sure that it will surprise members no end to hear that I am going to talk about Royal Aberdeen golf club, which is in my constituency. Between July 10 and 13 next year, Royal Aberdeen is going to host the 2014 Scottish open. In order to link this to the Ryder cup, I note that the course is also the one where, in 2005, the British senior open was held. That was won by the current US Ryder cup captain, Tom Watson, in a sudden-death playoff against Des Smyth, himself a previous European Ryder cup vice-captain. The course, due to its hosting of the Scottish open in the year of the Ryder cup and the fact that it has a link—albeit tenuous—to the current Ryder cup line-up, sees itself as being in a position to capitalise on the presence of the Ryder cup in Scotland and the ensuing golf tourism. Having spoken to Ronnie MacAskill, the director of golf at Royal Aberdeen golf club, I know that he is keen to see the club benefit in that way. In 2005, some 23,349 people came to Royal Aberdeen for the senior open. The club hopes that more than that will come in 2014 for the Scottish open, which is estimated to generate somewhere in the region of £10 million for the local economy. I have mentioned previously the controversy that existed around the hosting of the event by Royal Aberdeen. That controversy arose not through anything that the Scottish Government said, but through the actions of some local councillors in Aberdeen, who have taken the opportunity to play politics with the event. I would hope that the issue will finally be dropped and that we can get on with looking forward to what will be a fantastic event for the city of Aberdeen, rather than seeing some people seeking to undermine the event for narrow political agendas. I was interested in the mentions of the clubgolf programme and undertook to look up the statistics for Aberdeen—I was unable to get statistics right down to constituency level, but I got hold of the participation rates for Aberdeen. I hear what Patricia Ferguson was saying about wanting to encourage greater participation, and I absolutely concur with her words. However it is interesting to note that the Aberdeen figures show that the level of participation for girls is virtually the same as it is for boys—the last figures that were made available showed 650 girls participating and 662 boys participating. As has been mentioned, the female game is on the rise in terms of skill levels—we see female golfers occasionally joining male tournaments in the United States, and I think that we will start to see more of that as the elite female golfers become ever closer to the elite male golfers in terms of ability. I am not saying that they are not capable golfers but, obviously, the physiology often leads to them not being able to drive the same distances, although that is becoming less and less of an issue. I hear Mr Findlay sighing, but I recently watched the Solheim cup on Sky television, and I have to say that I found it to be almost as exciting as any Ryder cup match that I have ever watched, or any other tournament. I think that the Solheim cup is very much on the rise as well, and perhaps Scotland should bid to hold it at some stage in the future. Aberdeen has its own link to the Ryder cup through Paul Lawrie, who played in 1999 and was joint top point scorer and then played in 2012. It was something of a rich moment for Paul Lawrie—who was, obviously, on the receiving end of the Brookline result—to be able to be involved in the Medinah result; indeed, he played a key role in it, through his defeat of Brandt Snedeker in the singles play on the final day. Paul Lawrie has launched the Paul Lawrie Foundation, which encourages young people to get involved in the game and seeks to develop their enthusiasm for the sport. It and the Scottish Government’s clubgolf initiative are the kind of things that we should be seeking to advance and to support where possible. I note Mr Findlay’s comments about the future of many golf clubs hanging in the balance, with depressed incomes leading to people taking themselves off waiting lists. I think that the Ryder cup might have the opposite effect, in that through the increased interest in golf that it could generate, more people might seek to take up the sport, in the same way as people often seek to take up tennis in the immediate aftermath of Wimbledon. Often, the ripple is very shallow, but we might see more people becoming interested in getting involved in local golf. I wonder whether something could be done to support some of those municipal clubs that might see an upsurge in applications for membership with which they might find that they are unable to cope in the initial stages. Perhaps something could be done through the Scottish Government’s legacy work to help to support the clubs and enable them to take on more members, because we want to ensure that people who find themselves enthused and inspired to get involved in golf—or perhaps to get back into golf—do not find that they are unable to do so, because we want to encourage more people to take up the sport as a result of the Ryder cup. I look forward to hearing the minister’s remarks in her closing speech.

Will the member give way?

Will Margaret McDougall accept that legislation is not necessarily required in order to drive economic growth?

Will the member give way?

Ken Macintosh has introduced the interesting concept of a populist cut. I am not entirely sure what he meant. However, we know that Ken Macintosh welcomes the council tax freeze, free prescriptions and other things that the Scottish Government is doing to keep money in the pockets of people at the sharp end, as Mr Ewing said. We know that, because that is why Mr Macintosh unfortunately finds himself on the back benches; he did not agree with the “something for nothing” speech. It seems that his successor in the finance role, Mr Gray, does not agree with the “something for nothing” speech, either. In that speech, Ms Lamont said that university standards are in decline, but Mr Gray has accepted that we have world-class universities in Scotland. I welcome that acknowledgement, although I do not welcome what might await Mr Gray when his leader finds out that he too has ditched the rhetoric of her speech. Mr Gray threw out the usual insult about the First Minister’s attendance at the Ryder cup. Let us talk about a different golf tournament. The Scottish Open is due to come to the Royal Aberdeen Golf Club course in my constituency in 2014, and it is estimated that the event will generate £10 million for the local economy in Aberdeen. Only yesterday, Rory McIlroy, one of the world’s top players, announced his intention to play at the event, which I am sure will significantly boost the number of people who attend. Members might assume that the event’s coming to Aberdeen would be universally welcomed, but that is not the case. Local Labour councillors are calling on the Scottish Government to pull the plug and withdraw funding from the event. I cannot for a second believe that a Labour Party that claims that it cares about the country’s economic development would seek to inflict such economic vandalism on Aberdeen, simply to pursue a grudge against the First Minister. However, that it should do so rather demonstrates the measure of the Labour Party in Aberdeen and at national level. Kevin Stewart talked about NCIMB, which is in my constituency. I, too, attended the briefing that he mentioned, at which we also heard from NovaBiotics Ltd, which is also based in my constituency, at the Craibstone estate. NovaBiotics chief executive, Dr Deborah O’Neil, outlined the company’s work, which involves partnership with venture capital and angel investment to roll out a product that will have a significant impact in relation to curing fungal nail infection. Members might not have expected to hear about fungal nail infection during a debate on the Scottish economy.

If it is about fungal nail infection, I will do so.

We aim to please, Mr Rennie. There are three important points about the product. The first is that the rolling out of the product is about creating jobs and making money within the economy. The second is the fact that the company was spun out from the Rowett Institute of Nutrition and Health and is one of the many companies that are being spun out from our world-class universities. Indeed, the PraxisUnico annual report shows that the University of Edinburgh, the University of Aberdeen, the University of Glasgow, the University of Strathclyde and Heriot-Watt University all feature in the top 10 universities that are most active in the creation of spin-outs in the past three years. That is testament to the great work that is being done in our universities and the support that is being given to the companies to help them to spin out. The third key point, which addresses the point that Alison Johnstone and Joan McAlpine raised in their contributions, is that the majority of the companies are female-led. In fact, the majority of the companies that we heard from at the briefing were female-led. It is acknowledged that the life sciences sector sees a disproportionate number of females graduating versus the number of males. By encouraging spin-out companies in the life sciences sector, we can start to address the imbalance that those members spoke about in female entrepreneurship in Scotland. I agree and accept that that will not resolve the entire issue, but it would help to go some of the way.

I agree absolutely. What we have done with the powers that we have, with the small business bonus scheme, is helping, but I agree that being able to offer a range of different tax incentives, particularly to start-up and spin-out companies, would be beneficial. I turn to Gavin Brown, who spoke about assistance to the construction industry. I visited Anderson Construction, which is based in my constituency. It employs 40 people and sustains 40 subcontracts at any one time.

The chief executive, Kenny Anderson, highlighted to me that the most important thing that we can do to help the construction industry is to use direct capital investment. While Mr Brown says that we could offer a wee bit more rates relief to the construction industry, the clear message from the construction industry is that direct capital investment—the very thing that Mr Brown’s own Chancellor of the Exchequer is choking off—is what it requires. Will Mr Brown take that argument to his chancellor? [Interruption.] His sedentary remarks appear to indicate that he will simply act as another apologist for the austerity regime rather than take back the serious concerns of the construction industry. That is why it is important that we have the powers here. We are not about power for power’s sake; we want power as a means to deliver a better regime for business and to deliver a stronger economy for Scotland. The Opposition parties need to raise their game in terms of ambition and imagination for the future of Scotland. With the powers here in Scotland, we can deliver for the Scottish economy a much brighter future.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I am interested in Mr Chisholm’s reference to our much-missed friend Dr Neil MacCormick. Would he define himself and the Labour Party as existentialist unionists?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Drew Smith’s leader said that her mind was changed on devolution when she saw the impact of the Thatcher policies on the children that she taught. Does he not look at what is happening to disabled people in Scotland under the current Tory Government and reflect that we would perhaps be better taking decisions on welfare in this chamber?

Correct me if I am wrong, but I seem to recall the member and his colleagues voting for a situation in which the Parliament would have sat for almost the entirety of purdah, not just the beginning of purdah. Can he clarify his position on that?

Will the member give way?

Perhaps the member can clarify the point that her colleague Drew Smith could not as to why Labour members voted for the Parliament to sit for almost the entirety of purdah rather than merely the first two days.

Will Lewis Macdonald give way?

Will the member give way?

I recognise what Mary Fee is saying. However, I served on Aberdeen City Council from 2007 to 2012 when it was trying to deal with the issue. Will she acknowledge the role that many of her Labour colleagues played in bandying around rhetoric that was frankly unsuitable?

Presiding Officer, I begin by apologising that I will have to leave at the conclusion of my speech to get to a public meeting in my constituency this evening. I notified you in advance to that effect. I was interested to read the report by the Equal Opportunities Committee. I note that it took evidence at the Clinterty site, which is located in my constituency. It has 17 permanent plots and four short-term plots. One of the difficulties that the council has always faced is that those plots are invariably always being let at the time when encampments arrive in Aberdeen, so there is no suitable alternative site to which the council can direct the Travelling community. I am more than familiar with the issue now, as an MSP, but I was also familiar with it in my time as a local councillor for Dyce, Bucksburn and Danestone. Over the summer of 2007, just after I was elected, there were a number of encampments in my council ward, which led to the heightened tensions that members have identified. As part of the coalition administration in Aberdeen, I did what I could to try to get the issue addressed. Indeed, rather than it being the convener of the north area committee who moved recommendations on establishing halting sites, I had to do it as a member of the committee because the convener was unwilling to put his head above the parapet and take those tough decisions. During our time in that administration, we found that the lack of leadership pervaded the council, both in terms of our coalition colleagues, who were unwilling to take a stance in favour of halting sites and to pursue them, and in the often reprehensible rhetoric, which I will return to, of opposition councillors, who sought to make political capital from the issue and to put us in a difficult position. We therefore took the view that one of the difficulties that we faced as a council was that clashes were inevitable between the need to establish a halting site and the kickback that we would get from a settled community if we attempted to establish a site next to it. We agreed that one way in which to deal with that would be to put into the council’s local development plan a requirement to establish a halting site in certain sizes of new development. Again, we found ourselves being attacked on that by political opportunists, but we pressed ahead with it nonetheless. Let us fast-forward to 2013. At the beginning of the year, the council administration announced plans to develop halting sites. However, the way in which the plans were unveiled and the complete failure to consult on the sites have further badly damaged community relations in Aberdeen. If a council is going to establish halting sites, it must engage with the settled community. We understand that that is a difficult sell for politicians, but it is not good enough to do nothing to consult communities and bring them along with the plans. In Aberdeen, the council is attempting to pass the buck on the issue. Although the establishment of halting sites is the council’s responsibility, at the full council meeting in August the council moved that it will not progress a halting site until the Scottish Government grants a byelaw to the city that, as Councillor Willie Young said, would “make illegal camping a criminal and not just a civil offence.” That does not help to move the issue forward in the way that the Equal Opportunities Committee wants it to move forward. Indeed, in letters to me, the Solicitor General for Scotland and Police Scotland suggested that a byelaw is entirely unnecessary, because the existence of halting sites will mean that a council is free to take appropriate steps if an unauthorised encampment exists in its area and people are reluctant to move to the halting sites that have been created. I want to get back to talking about the rhetoric. I understand that emotions often run high on the matter. We need only look at the reporting and letters pages in the papers and at the letters that all elected members who have encampments in their constituencies or council wards receive from the settled community to see that. That is why it is vital that politicians, whether at national or local level, are careful in the language that we use when we deal with the issue. We have a responsibility not to heighten tensions or inflame opinion. The current housing convener in Aberdeen City Council, Neil Cooney, said recently: “Aberdeen City Council recognises Gypsy/Travellers as a marginalised, vulnerable group who historically have experienced discrimination and disadvantage”. I think that we all agree with that statement, but the difficulty that I have is that that is the same Neil Cooney who, when he was in opposition in the council in 2007, hit the headlines when he accused Gypsy Travellers of “environmental terrorism”. Such rhetoric has no place in the debate. Indeed, at the time, Alfie Kefford, the chairman of the Gypsy Council, said that Councillor Cooney’s remarks were “highly offensive” and “We are extremely angry at what this man has said and want him sacked.” Instead of being sacked, Councillor Cooney has now been appointed as convener of housing and environment and is responsible for Aberdeen City Council’s leadership on the Gypsy Traveller situation. If the local approach is to put individuals who use such rhetoric in positions of leadership on the issue, it is little wonder that there has been little movement. I very much hope that all members will use their influence on councillors and local politicians to ensure that the discussions and debates that need to happen do so in a respectful manner, without the kind of rhetoric that I described.

I attended school with one of the victims of the 2009 Super Puma accident and I, too, have family and friends working offshore and using helicopters regularly, so I understand the concerns that exist in the workforce and their families. Today’s edition of The Press and Journal leads with the news that the seating configuration on helicopters is to be examined. There are wider concerns among the workforce that the efficiency of crew turnaround and getting helicopters back into the air may have led to some of the safety and maintenance agenda slipping. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, whatever the ultimate causes of the tragedy off the coast of Shetland, we must ensure that the wider safety regime is the primary focus of any review and that operators must examine carefully whether they have struck the appropriate balance between safety and maintenance, and the efficiency of crew turnaround?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the offshore industry regarding the impact on the oil and gas industry in Scotland of the recent Super Puma tragedy.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his answer and I echo his expressions of condolence. Those of us who have family, friends and constituents who work in the offshore sector will know how difficult this period has been for many individuals across Scotland. Will the cabinet secretary advise in what ways the Scottish Government is able and stands ready to support an industry review of helicopter safety?

The cabinet secretary will also be aware that, as we have discussed, there are concerns among not just workers but their families around the continuing safety of helicopter flights to offshore installations. Can he confirm that his view is that there needs to be a careful dialogue between operators, the unions, the workforce and the wider oil and gas family—family members and so on—in order to restore some of the confidence that has been damaged by the recent incident and other incidents over the past five years?

This is my first speech in the Parliament since the Donside by-election. [Applause.] It is important that I begin by paying tribute to my predecessor, Brian Adam, who, as we all know, had tributes paid to him in the Parliament at the time of his passing. Brian was a great source of encouragement and inspiration for me during my time as an activist and then as a city councillor, when I worked closely with him. He was a man who always put the communities of his constituency at the forefront, and that is something that I aim to do in following in his footsteps. The Aberdeen Donside constituency is something of a microcosm for many of the issues that affect the wider Scotland. Its social dynamics, which members will have seen as they came to campaign, range from the affluent to the areas of poverty that still exist within what is regarded outside Aberdeen as a rich city. We still have what my colleague Kevin Stewart has oft described as poverty amidst plenty within the city of Aberdeen. I spent the summer going round my constituency and talking to various groups in the community about issues that affect them and, turning to the legislative programme that lies before us, I note that much in it will be of interest and benefit to the communities that I represent. It was interesting to note Johann Lamont claiming that Scotland is now on pause. I think that it is worth noting that Ms Lamont seemed to spend the entire summer on mute. The community empowerment and renewal bill will offer significant opportunities for community groups and organisations across Scotland. I echo some of what Alison Johnstone said about that. I hope that it will allow, for example, the development of community gardens and play facilities, and allow sports clubs to come together to develop facilities on land that is currently unused. Those are the kind of opportunities that we want to see being unlocked, because there often seems to be far too much bureaucratic process lying in the way of that happening. I hope that legislation can be introduced that will allow such groups to take control of resources within their communities and operate them for the benefit of people in their communities. One of the other interesting and very welcome elements of the legislative programme is the airgun licensing. I encountered that issue during my time in Aberdeen as a parliamentary researcher and latterly as a councillor. It was being pushed very hard by Norman Collie, a Labour councillor at that time, in relation to a potential City of Aberdeen byelaw to deal with the issue. I was delighted to receive Norman Collie’s backing and endorsement during the course of the Donside by-election campaign and I am sure that he would be equally delighted to learn of the progress that is being made on airgun licensing in this Parliament. It is a demonstration of this Parliament taking action in Scotland to deal with priorities that have been identified within Scotland. I noticed George Osborne’s visit to my constituency today. He trotted out the claim that we do not need to look at taking control of oil in Scotland because it is already benefiting Scotland, apparently. If he took the time while visiting my constituency to go and knock the doors in areas such as Middlefield and Cummings Park, he would encounter many individuals who are feeling the sharp end of his welfare reform and austerity agenda. What we need to do is less of the taking away of the benefits from people and more to ensure that those who are in work—

No, no, no. We need to do more to ensure that those who are in work and who rely on in-work benefits because of poor pay are lifted out of that depressing cycle. That is a way to reduce the benefit bill and improve the lot of people. It would be far better if we saw George Osborne acting on that, rather than coming to preach to Scotland. That is why the legislative underpinning of the welfare fund is welcome—albeit depressing, because it highlights the idea that pervades the unionist parties that the function of the chamber should be to mitigate bad decisions taken at Westminster using only the small array of tools at our disposal. If that lack of self-belief and vision is so inherent in the no campaign, it is little wonder that its supporters cannot lift their eyes to the horizon and look at the future that Scotland could see and could realise, were the chamber possessed of the full powers of independence to take decisions on behalf of the people who elect us.

Very briefly.

In an interesting twist of fate, the Scottish welfare fund is also being administered via Scotland’s local authorities. I am sure that the member will welcome that, given that she is so concerned about giving powers to local authorities. Perhaps if the member gets on the blower to her local Labour council and gets it to do more to promote the welfare fund, she might find that it would start to spend some of that money on the people who need it the most. The eyes of the world will be on us over the next 12 months as we shape up for the independence referendum. We stand ready to join the family of nations as a full member, but again we find self-belief and vision so lacking as Alistair Darling claims that Scotland would struggle on the world stage and would not have the reputation of the UK in international affairs. I am not entirely sure that that is necessarily a bad thing, but it is worth pausing to look at nations around us. If we look at the pivotal role played by Norway during the course of the Middle East peace process and at the exemplary record of Ireland when it comes to contributions to United Nations peacekeeping missions, we see that being a big country waving its guns around and swaggering on the world stage does not necessarily make that country a key contributor to world affairs. All too often, the UK’s reputation is that of one who hides behind the playground bully and occasionally peeks out to say “Yeah” in support. That is not the reputation that I want for Scotland on the international stage. We can do better; we will do better.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I thank the member for giving way. He mentioned zero-hours contracts, pay and conditions and expenditure on housing. Can he remind us where, in relation to this Parliament, decisions on employment and capital spending are taken?

Surely Malcolm Chisholm will recognise that, alongside the bedroom tax, there are a range of other welfare reforms that are impacting on his constituents and mine. The simple fact is that, within the fixed budget of the Scottish Government, to select the bedroom tax above other parts of the welfare reform agenda would lead to pressure to move resources to other elements of welfare reform. Would it not be better if we took those decisions here, in this chamber, rather than picking and choosing which welfare reforms we mitigate and which we do not?

It was interesting that Liz Smith finished on the subject of modern languages. I recently visited Danestone primary school in Aberdeen, which is in my former council ward, and I learned about the positive work that is being done there around the teaching of Mandarin Chinese to primary school pupils. Visa restrictions are a difficulty for the scheme to introduce Mandarin, as the system does not allow Chinese teachers to come and teach in Scotland on two to three-year secondments. They are only being awarded 12-month visas, with the potential—but no guarantee—of a 12-month extension. I hope that the work that I know the Scottish Government is doing will help to persuade the UK Government to consider that scheme sympathetically for a possible relaxation of the visa restrictions. I hope that we can count on Liz Smith’s support—perhaps she can use her influence over the UK Government. It was my great privilege to be invited to speak at the launch of the Prince’s Trust get into energy event at the Marcliffe Hotel in Aberdeen on 22 April. At the event, we heard moving testimony from a Prince’s Trust ambassador, Marie Cope, a young Aberdeen mum whose life turned around through work with the Prince’s Trust programme. Marie began skipping school at a very young age, and quickly fell into bad company, finding herself involved in abusive relationships and substance misuse. She became a single mother saddled with significant financial debts and in constant fear of visits to her home from debt collectors, which led to her developing a severe fear of opening the door when someone knocked at it. Thanks to the Prince’s Trust’s get into retail programme, Marie was able to remove herself from some of the negative influences that she was surrounded by. She was able to turn her life around and is now a youth ambassador for the Prince’s Trust and a strong testimony to the success of the Prince’s Trust programmes in helping vulnerable young people to turn their lives around and get into work. That is what the focus of the get into energy programme was about. The event was held during north-east business week and served as a good example of how large local employers—particularly in the oil and gas sector, which, as we know, is extremely prominent in the north-east of Scotland—can use their influence and expertise to make a difference to disadvantaged young people and use their corporate social responsibility budgets and departments to best effect by investing in young people, who may become their staff in the future. There is a clear correlation between youth unemployment and mental health issues, and between youth unemployment and growing up in some of the more deprived communities under the Scottish index of multiple deprivation. By investing in schemes such as get into energy and other Prince’s Trust schemes, companies can make a targeted difference and try to mitigate the effect of austerity—and we know that austerity hits hardest those who were vulnerable before a recession. Through promoting those programmes and companies’ involvement in them, we can make a targeted difference to those people, who probably most need targeted support and assistance to gain access to the workforce. The energy leadership group is currently of particular interest in the north-east. It is a group of energy companies that come together to provide opportunities to disadvantaged young people, mostly from the north-east of Scotland. The scheme works by companies paying money to the Prince’s Trust and, in return, the young people go on to their training and mentoring programmes and potentially go on to work for them. The companies provide internships and training schemes for young people who are interested in the sector and issue development awards. It is clear that not everybody who goes into the scheme will subsequently find employment in the company with which they are involved, but the fact that they get an opportunity to develop as an individual will stand them in far better stead when they go into the jobs market than perhaps would be the case if the scheme did not exist. I want to mention the work of the young Scotland’s got talent campaign, which is for young people with learning disabilities and young people on the autistic spectrum. The campaign helps them to access the employment support services that they need—specifically, it is for those who are able to take part in employment and want to do so. It takes the form of a roadshow at various venues across Scotland and is organised jointly by the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability, Enable Scotland and Values Into Action Scotland. It gathers together young people with learning disabilities and young people on the autistic spectrum, their families, professional bodies and public bodies, including colleges and Government agencies, to share ideas, experiences and opportunities for gaining employment and further skills. The fact that it brings together individuals who would benefit from supported employment schemes and organisations that have the capacity to provide them helps to make links and connections for people who can often find it difficult to access the jobs market. The next event is to be held in the Grampian region, at the Aberdeen arts centre, on Wednesday, 5 June. I hope that the minister considers this an invitation to go up to Aberdeen, visit the event and see for herself the work that is being done. I know that the Glasgow event in 2010 was attended by 350 young people and that almost 400 more wanted to attend it but were not able to do so because of the size of the venue. That demonstrates the capacity and appetite out there. In Aberdeen, my colleague Gordon Townson, who is in the Aberdeen City Council Scottish National Party group, has promoted a youth employment strategy for the council through a notice of motion to the council. Aberdeen’s youth employment rate is well above the national average, but it is quite clear from the debate and the Government’s actions that we cannot be complacent. The schemes that I have highlighted plus the actions that the Scottish Government and other agencies are taking demonstrate that we are taking the matter very seriously.

It was interesting to hear Sarah Boyack say that this is a current problem, because I suggest that it is an historical one. One of the problems in the health service’s infrastructure is that for too many years issues were put on the back burner, and we did not in the good times use money to redevelop facilities and services as well as possible. We have a resultant backlog, and difficulties are emerging. It is therefore a problem from the past that is affecting us in the here and now.

I have only four minutes. Were it a longer debate, we might have had more time for interventions. I have a lot to get through. It is always good to be in the chamber discussing the health service and its importance. It is disappointing how we sometimes find ourselves discussing it, though. I want to look at some strong local examples, then perhaps to focus more on the national picture. There are two good examples of facilities being developed in Aberdeen that I think will make a real impact on how health services are delivered there. Nanette Milne and I have both visited the new state-of-the-art emergency care centre in Aberdeen, which is a £110 million project that will improve and enhance the patient experience and will, I hope, lead to a reduction in the length of time that people are required to be in the care of the health service, which will obviously be beneficial. In addition, in terms of the gateway services that we rely on, a project to build a new Woodside Fountain health centre serving the communities of Woodside and Tillydrone is being delivered through hub funding of £4 million. There are in that area some deprived communities that the new centre will benefit. The point is that facilities require to change and move with the times—and they do—in order to adapt themselves to changed circumstances. On the wider picture of Scotland’s health, I note the cabinet secretary’s announcement about a bed-management tool, which will help health boards to plan appropriately for their future requirements. For too long, the short-termism that has dominated how we do things—not just in politics, but in general—has meant that we have not looked at and dealt with long-term challenges that are on the horizon. The tool will assist in that. Demographic change will not just put pressure on beds in the health service. There will also be a requirement for more people to act as unpaid carers. I have experience of that; my mother cared for her mother, who had dementia. More people will choose that option, rather than rely on social care or health services to take on the caring role. We need to ensure that appropriate support is in place, which is why the carers strategy and the dementia strategy are so important. We need to ensure that there is early diagnosis and intervention and that individuals get the most appropriate care and support, in the setting that is most appropriate for them. If that setting is in the health service, we must ensure that capacity exists, but the preference will always be for care to be delivered in the person’s own home, to give them a degree of personal independence and to allow them to live as fulfilling a life as possible.

I am sorry, but I have only 45 seconds left. The integration argument is key. The integration of healthcare and social care is absolutely about closing gaps, breaking down silos and ensuring that unnecessary hospitalisation does not occur. Let us be honest: in the past, people have found themselves in an acute-care setting when they did not need to be there, because social care and healthcare services were not taking a joined-up approach. The health service will always evolve to address needs, so we must ensure that it is properly resourced and flexible enough to change. The Government’s commitment to protecting the health service budget will help in that regard, as will measures that are being taken to ensure that there is flexibility in the future.

Will the member give way?

I rise as a former member of the Finance Committee. Although I was not part of the stage 1 deliberations on the Land and Buildings Transaction Tax (Scotland) Bill, I was part of the committee when evidence was being taken regarding the transfer of powers under the Scotland Bill—now the Scotland Act 2012. I will touch on that later in my speech. There are three key areas that I wish to consider. The first involves the progressive nature of the land and buildings transaction tax as introduced by the Scottish Government. The second is about the administration of taxation in Scotland, specifically in relation to LBTT. Thirdly, there is the principle of greater control. I start with the progressive nature of the tax. The idea that the burden of payment should reflect the ability of the payer to bear it is the principle that has guided the bill. We can consider some of the supportive comments that have been made in that regard. Isobel d’Inverno, convener of the Law Society of Scotland’s tax law committee said: “We strongly support the replacement of the slab system of stamp duty land tax, which many perceive as unfair due to the steep rise in tax for properties just above the thresholds. This distorts the market by keeping prices artificially low and gives rise to tax avoidance. We are certain that the proposed new progressive structure will be fairer and simpler for those buying a house.” The Edinburgh Solicitors Property Centre was quoted in the Evening Times as saying that the current structure of slab duty “creates inequalities in the level of taxation paid.” I note that, in its submission to the Finance Committee, the Council of Mortgage Lenders Scotland said: “While there would be winners and losers out of any new system we believe a progressive system would be more equitable and overcome some of the inefficiencies created by the slab system.” I think that that will be an important measure. I say that especially as a member who represents North East Scotland, where property prices are high. That means not only that property is expensive and towards the upper end of the scale to which the duty would apply, but that properties that are further down the property ladder also have inflated prices. At the moment, stamp duty is exempted for houses that sell for less than £125,000, but it is difficult to find a decent-sized family property in Aberdeen and other parts of the north-east that would come under that threshold. By raising the threshold under which duty will not apply, the Scottish Government will benefit constituents of mine, many of whom—either young families or first-time buyers—are looking to make that step onto the property ladder. I therefore welcome the move and disagree with those who have said that first-time buyers are not necessarily looking to buy those kinds of properties. In some parts of Scotland, those kinds of properties are the only ones that are available. Therefore, the introduction of the new levels as part of LBTT is welcome. I welcome the establishment of revenue Scotland. In particular, I welcome the fact that it will be able to deliver greater efficiency in the administration of tax; the administration costs will be around 25 per cent lower than those of HMRC. That will be of benefit not only to the Scottish Government, but to the taxpayer, because it will avoid some of the inefficiencies that might otherwise have existed in the system. When the Finance Committee took evidence from HMRC on the introduction of new tax powers, I asked whether, in theory, it could refuse to administer the new taxes on behalf of the Scottish Government, were the Scottish Government to take a radically different approach to that which exists in the rest of the UK. I was told that, in theory, it could. That might have meant that the Scottish Government could have found itself unnecessarily hamstrung had it chosen not to establish revenue Scotland and instead to rely on HMRC, because it might have been unable to create a different kind of system along the lines of LBTT. The establishment of revenue Scotland will allow the Scottish Government that flexibility and the ability to do something different. The creation of revenue Scotland also demonstrates that the Government and this Parliament are capable of handling the burden of greater power and responsibility being handed to us. That said, we must accept that, even with the new taxes being transferred to Scotland, 85 per cent of the tax that is paid in Scotland will remain reserved and the Scottish Parliament will have control of and responsibility for only 58 per cent of the revenue that is spent in Scotland. The Government and I want that to shift more towards Scotland having greater control of the revenue of Scotland and having all the revenue and taxation powers of Scotland at its disposal. If LBTT does nothing else, it serves as a microcosm that shows that this Parliament and this Government can do something radically different from the status quo. We can do something more innovative and progressive on taxation when the powers exist in this Parliament to do so. I look forward to the day when LBTT comes into force, but I also look forward to the day when this Parliament takes control of the other taxation and revenue-raising powers that would exist with independence, because I believe that what we are doing today demonstrates that a different approach is not only possible but optimal.

Mr Rennie assumes that welfare reform exists within a bubble. Is he aware of the tax avoidance bill that the UK Government faces? Does he agree that diverting more effort towards catching the people who avoid tax, rather than punishing those who are on benefits, might help to pay for some of the extra costs that he claims are being identified?

I do not want to get hung up on the bedroom tax and spend the entirety of my speech on that topic, but I want to mention it briefly at the beginning; it will also come up in one of the case studies to which I will refer. I received a report from the charity Crisis entitled “The homelessness monitor: Scotland 2012”, which was published in December 2012. The report was put together by Crisis, Heriot-Watt University and the University of York. It highlights two other changes that are being made in the housing sphere that will impact on homelessness in Scotland beyond the bedroom tax. The first change mentioned in the report is the “extension of the ‘Shared Accommodation Rate’ of Local Housing Allowance to 25-34 year-olds living in the private rented sector, which will increase pressure on a limited supply of shared accommodation and possibly force vulnerable people into inappropriate shared settings (even with the concession for those who have lived in hostels for at least three months)”. The other change is the “increased conditionality and sanctions associated with the Work Programme, coupled with the transferring of many vulnerable complaints from sickness benefits into Jobseeker’s Allowance, implying the possibility of stringent sanctions applied to vulnerable single homeless people and others with chaotic lifestyles.” Therefore, it would be wrong to say that only the bedroom tax will have an impact on the homelessness agenda. An interesting thing about the bedroom tax is that because we have ended priority need in Scotland, 64 per cent of homeless applications come from single people, as opposed to 25 per cent south of the border. However, one-bedroom properties make up 26 per cent of social housing, which means that people who are homeless will be housed in properties in which they will find themselves subjected to the bedroom tax. We should not single out the bedroom tax for mitigation, because there are other benefits that people might wish us to mitigate. We therefore must make the case for why we can mitigate one but not another. We can do that for council tax benefit because power has been passed in its entirety to this Parliament’s control. However, the bedroom tax remains a reserved imposition on Scotland, rather than something that has been transferred to our control. Drew Smith was correct when he said to Willie Rennie that if the policy is about saving money it can work only if people do not relocate—in effect, the bedroom tax can work only if it does not work. The stated aim of the policy, according to UK ministers, is to encourage people to relocate to a smaller property, but it will not save money, as Mr Rennie alleges that it will; it will simply be ineffective. Mr Rennie accused members of being spineless. I know that I am not, because if I lacked a spine I would be getting annual invitations to see Atos, to find out whether it had grown back and I was capable of work. That is the process that disabled people are having to go through, as though a miracle can have somehow occurred in the previous 12 months. I have heard tales of people who are, in effect, in a childlike state because of brain injuries but who are constantly invited back, as if the brain injury will have gone away in the 12 months since they were last assessed. Such bureaucracy will clearly cost money to administer, as well as being utterly degrading for the people who go through it. I will focus on a couple of cases to do with autism, which is an issue that is close to my heart. I mentioned one of them in last Thursday’s debate. Tracy Mahoney is a Castlehill Housing Association tenant in Sheddocksley, in Aberdeen. She has two sons: Bradley, who is 14 and has additional support needs; and Jason, who is 11 and has autism. They live in a three-bedroom house, which was given to them because the paediatric consultant said that Jason required a bedroom to himself because of his behavioural and sleeping issues. Tracy is now losing £50 a month as a result of the housing benefit underoccupancy rule, although she needs a bedroom for Jason as a result of his autism. Today in the Daily Record, we read about Sandy Miklinski, a 27-year-old with autism, and his experience of assessments for DLA and for work capability. The people who assessed him admitted to having little understanding of autism and what it entails, but he has been put into work situations that are clearly not suitable for individuals with autism. Welfare reform might be necessary, but what is also necessary is an understanding of the conditions with which people present, so that people can be treated as humanely as possible. Autism is a difficult disability to recognise, because it does not present through physical symptoms, but it is crucial that people understand it before they consider putting a person into a workplace that might prove stressful and counterproductive for them. Vulnerable people are not asking for much. UK ministers appear to be putting forward the view that the welfare state is a comfort blanket. It is not a comfort blanket; it is a safety net. As Michael McMahon said, the UK Government is widening the holes in the safety net, so that more people fall through it. The poor are hit by welfare cuts at the same time as the rich get tax cuts. I could sum up the UK Government’s logic as, “The rich will work harder if we give them more money and the poor will work harder if we give them less money.” The approach is ridiculous and inhumane and attacks the most vulnerable people in society. The UK Government ought to be ashamed of itself.

Does Mr Harvie agree that the constant overreporting of the number of people who claim benefit fraudulently—who account for a tiny proportion of the benefit spend—which gives the impression that such behaviour is far more widespread than it is, also contributes to the use of such rhetoric?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I appreciate the points that are being raised, but is the minister aware that Aberdeenshire Council is heading towards an underspend on its revenue budget over the past two years of some £53 million? Does he agree that the council should not need to apply to the Scottish Government for funding when it has such dramatic underspends and could fund capital projects from the current revenue underspend?

Will the member give way?

I, too, grew up during the Margaret Thatcher era. I was born in 1980, one year after Jamie Hepburn and two years after the leader of the Scottish Conservatives—a point of mathematics that makes me think that she might want to check how old she actually was when the Berlin wall came down. I am sure that she was not 10—I think that she will find that it was her 11th birthday rather than her 10th birthday. Mr Lamont’s point that we surely would not want to go back to what life was like before Thatcher brought to mind the book “Animal Farm” by George Orwell, in which the animals are constantly told by the pigs that, although things might be bad right now, they would not want Farmer Jones back and to go back to the way that it was before. The idea is that things might be bad now, but they were a whole lot worse before. John Lamont also told us about the Conservative Party’s bid to tackle the culture of entitlement. When I am being lectured on the culture of entitlement, I always think of those silver-spoon inherited millionaires in the Tory Cabinet. A number of Conservative members mentioned the quote on which the debate is founded and said that Margaret Thatcher’s comments were about individuals’ reliance on the state for support. Why she did not just say that, instead of saying that there is no such thing as society, only she would have known. However, people can often require the support of the state as a result of the policies of the state. When the state’s economic policies have led to individuals becoming unemployed and, as a consequence of that unemployment, losing the roof over their head, it is perfectly acceptable for those people to feel that the state has some duty to house them. The notion that the state has a role—nay, a duty—to provide support is absolutely one of the bedrocks. The state’s duty to protect its citizens extends beyond defence of the realm and is as much about social and economic policy as it is about defence policy. Nobody is born into our society owing it a thing, and we should never think that that is the case; however, it does not mean that the state does not have duties towards people even if they have not yet made any contribution to society. I take a different view on the right to buy from that articulated by some members. I consider that the right to buy was absolutely the wrong policy, not just because its mechanics did not allow for the replacement of the social housing that was sold off but because, by its creation, it established a stigma around the concept of home ownership, rental and social housing in general—a stigma that persists to this day. Although the Scottish Government has taken the not only welcome but necessary step of ending the right to buy, that stigma around home ownership and rental is being entrenched as a result of the introduction of the vile bedroom tax by the Government south of the border. I accept that the bedroom tax applies not only to those in housing association or council homes but to those in the private rented sector, but we should accept that the measure is part of the overall stigmatisation of those who do not own their home because of their personal economic circumstances or simply because they choose not to do so. We should never forget that choosing not to own a property is a valid choice. One consequence of the bedroom tax has been highlighted in my area of Aberdeen by a constituent, Tracy Mahoney, who came to me following the publicising of her case. She has a son who is autistic and who requires his own bedroom because his sleeping patterns are disrupted. He and his brother need to have separate bedrooms so that they can both get a good night’s sleep and so that their lives can have some form of normality. Tracy has been affected by the bedroom tax and the policies that the Government down south is pursuing. That flies very much in the face of the notion of the state supporting individuals and ensuring that those who require help receive it. The debate is on the concept that there is such a thing as society. Therefore, having done a little deconstruction of some of the Thatcherite myths that are often perpetuated, I will end on an uplifting note that I think underlines the fact that, here in Scotland, we have a strong society. I will tell the story of a little boy in Aberdeen called Baxter Dick, who is 18 months old and who has spina bifida and hydrocephalus. He requires a buggy with supportive seating to help with his positioning, but it costs about £3,000, which his parents cannot pay. They have therefore taken a novel approach and set up a website called “Baxter Needs A Buggy!”, which they highlighted through Facebook and their friends and family. So far, 134 people have contributed through the website to raise the £3,000 necessary to buy Baxter his buggy and ensure that he can get around and enjoy the most fulfilling life. His mother made it clear when she spoke to the Aberdeen Evening Express that she and Baxter’s father could not have done that without the help of other people, some of whom did not even know them and who had no connection to them whatsoever. To me, that is what society is about—it is about individuals looking out for one another.

No—it is about individuals looking out for one another, not for themselves. That is what society is; it is not what Mrs Thatcher said in her interview.

9. To ask the Scottish Government how it ensures that local authorities meet their duty to ensure the safety of pupils travelling between home and school. (S4O-01993)

The minister may be aware of proposals by the Labour-led administration in Aberdeen City Council to close Bramble Brae primary school, which serves the regeneration area of Cummings Park, and merge it into the existing Quarryhill school. That would result in the children from the Bramble Brae catchment area having to cross Provost Fraser Drive, a road on which there has been an 18 per cent increase in morning traffic since 2010 and, regrettably, a number of accidents, including pedestrian fatalities. Although the minister cannot comment on individual cases, what advice would he offer to my constituents, who are keen to ensure that safety considerations are appropriately considered during the consultation process?

I welcome the minister’s response to Sandra White’s question and the establishment of the commission. He will be aware of concerns that have been raised around the policies that are in place at Aberdeen crematorium. The situation has led to the parents of babies who are born asleep and those who have miscarried becoming confused and uncertain whether they might have been entitled to receive ashes following cremation, and such uncertainty has reopened grief for many. Does the minister anticipate the commission making clear recommendations for situations in which the return of ashes is not possible that would provide clarity and, in many cases, closure for parents?

The member will appreciate that such projections are merely projections and that, for example, a well-honed, targeted immigration policy could address some of the issues. Does he agree that his party at Westminster does not have a well-honed, targeted immigration policy?

Will the member give way?

I appreciate that Mr Chisholm says that he and his colleagues want an open and honest debate. The Scottish Government is setting out its position in the debate by saying, “These are the services that we believe are key and which we should fund.” Would not the debate be open and honest if we got some indication from Mr Chisholm and his colleagues about which of those services they support—or do not support—and what they would do differently?

Will the member take an intervention?

Is it the member’s contention that Scotland is currently not saddled with debt as part of the United Kingdom?

When I intervened on Mr Kelly to ask what I assumed was a very simple question about whether Scotland is saddled with debt within the UK, I did not anticipate that he would go down the trajectory that he went down. The fact that on one hand Mr Kelly spoke about fairy tales and on the other hand talked about the bank bailouts in the terms that he did demonstrates quite clearly why I will not be taking any lessons from him about the economics of Scotland either in the here and now or under independence. It was interesting to listen to some of the rhetoric that was used in the debate. Siobhan McMahon said that it was the SNP that brought the term “something for nothing” into the debate. We are indeed using the term “something for nothing”. It is what is known in the trade as a direct quotation. It was from Johann Lamont’s speech on 25 September in which she said: “Scotland cannot be the only something for nothing country in the world.” It was the Labour Party that introduced the term into the debate, so its members should forgive us if we continue to use it to remind people of what the Labour Party thinks universal services are all about. In some respects, Willie Rennie was correct—I note that he is not here for the rare occasion when somebody says that in the chamber. He said that this debate is about priorities. I accept that it is about priorities. It is about stating what the priorities are within the fixed budget with which the Scottish Government is currently dealing. I recognise the sincerity with which Willie Rennie pursues the childcare issue as an agenda. It is something that he clearly feels passionately about. It is an issue on which we disagree because we feel that the priorities lie elsewhere. At the same time, his argument is fundamentally undermined by the fact that the Government that his party supports at Westminster is pursuing benefits changes that will see £1 billion of benefits cuts directly affect children in Scotland. Gavin Brown rose— I see that Mr Brown wishes to leap to the defence of his UK coalition colleague, so I will allow him to put forward an argument on Mr Rennie’s behalf.

The point that Mr Brown misses, which he always misses, is the impact that the budget has, in that it has changed to being linked to the consumer prices index, it does not take into account some of the changes that are taking place in the economy and it completely offsets the tax changes that he has trumpeted in the chamber. Those are the points that he fails to understand and always fails to take into account. I note that Mr Brown was receiving some support for his remarks from the Labour benches, which I thought was remarkable. I would have thought that, of all the people who would have joined in condemning the UK Government’s approach to benefits, Labour members would be among them, but apparently not. A number of my colleagues have made an important point regarding social cohesion: why it is important to consider universal benefits as being part of the social fabric. The point was made in evidence to the Health and Sport Committee in a written submission from Dr Gerry McCartney, the head of the public health observatory division at NHS Health Scotland. He said: “there are numerous dangers with a policy approach which reduces universal provision of services (e.g. means-testing prescription charges, school meals, dentistry and pensions) as this undermines the collectivism which supports taxation to pay for these services, increases stigma for those who use the services and results in reduced investment and reduced service quality”. We believe that those who are paying into the pot, often at a higher rate, should be entitled to receive something back at the end of or during the process. On prescriptions, I have been receiving missives on Twitter from Labour councillors, saying that we are giving free prescriptions to rich people. No—we are giving free prescriptions to sick people. There is a difference. Illness does not take account of someone’s income when it hits them. Therefore, they should be entitled to the same rights as anybody else who is struck by illness. The point about stigma is important. If two people are in the chemist to get their prescriptions and one has to pay at the counter while the other does not, that immediately indicates that one is on a low income but the other is not. That creates a stigma for the person who is receiving the free prescription in that they are marked out as somebody who requires the help of the state, rather than as somebody who is entitled to the help of the state. That is an important distinction. On the issue of affordability, I have to laugh at the juxtaposition of the points that Labour members have made. They wave around the not-so-secret document and quote things from it that are already in the public domain. Mr Macintosh says that the SNP is considering the affordability of pensions as if that is a bad thing for a Government to do, but Labour members then tell us that it is a good thing that the Labour Party is considering the affordability of universal services. On the one hand, it is bad for the Scottish Government to consider the affordability of pensions; on the other, it is a really good thing that Labour is considering the affordability of universal services.

No.

I am sorry, but I have only 30 seconds left.

Mr Macintosh can pass the point to Ms Dugdale for her winding-up speech. If considering affordability is bad in relation to pensions, Mr Macintosh must also accept that it is bad in relation to universal services. If it is good for universal services, surely it is also good to consider affordability with regard to pensions. We have an indication of at least one area where the Labour Party thinks that universality should be continued. Kezia Dugdale, who will be summing up the debate for the Labour Party, said on “Call Kaye” on 26 September 2012, the day after the “something for nothing” speech: “I think that probably free prescription charges would need to stay.” She can tell us in her summing-up speech whether she agrees with herself.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Where would Mr McNeil draw the line? Does he believe that rich people should be entitled to free treatment, including hip operations, on the national health service? If so, what distinguishes those from free prescriptions?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

But I have not got the microchip in.

As I have taken the bill forward I have been keen to listen to the views and representations of members, interested organisations, professional bodies and members of the public. I know that many people are happy that the bill’s current definition of a high hedge will solve the vast majority of high hedge problems, the typical scenario involving fast-growing conifers. Although the current definition includes hedges containing deciduous trees and shrubs as long as they do not form a majority of the hedge, I have been conscious that that definition would not deal with problems caused by high hedges that are wholly or mainly composed of deciduous trees or shrubs. Although wholly deciduous high hedges would typically pose less of a problem than coniferous hedges in respect of forming a barrier to light, I want to ensure that the bill solves as many problems as possible. I therefore have sympathy with people whom I have spoken to or who have written to me about problems with deciduous hedges. For me, the question has been whether the bill can be extended in that respect without causing problems for its operation in practice. Some of the potential problems have been highlighted in correspondence, to which Patrick Harvie alluded and which members will have recently received, from the Scottish Wildlife Trust and RSPB. Their correspondence re-emphasises the points that they raised at stage 1 about the greater wildlife and biodiversity value of deciduous trees in comparison with conifers, and it underlines their concerns about the potential for a wider definition to have a negative impact on biodiversity. Those are important issues, which deserve serious consideration, and officials supporting me in relation to the bill met representatives of both those organisations at a very early stage in the bill’s development to ensure that my consideration has been fully informed. As a result of that, I am aware that there are already many measures in place to protect wildlife and biodiversity, ranging from legislation such as the Nature Conservation (Scotland) Act 2004 to local authorities’ biodiversity action plans. Local authorities will need to take all those protections into account in making decisions regarding high hedges, and I am satisfied that they are capable of doing so. For that to happen in practice, it is important that the guidance that the Government is to issue on the operation of the legislation provides full details regarding those matters. I have discussed the issue with the minister, and he has agreed that the Scottish Wildlife Trust and RSPB will be invited to contribute to and comment on the guidance before it is published to ensure that it fully addresses their concerns. I have written to both organisations to confirm that, and I hope that they will accept the minister’s invitation to participate actively in the development of the guidance. I have been keen to ensure that the bill provides local authorities with a means of resolving disputes without demanding that they find additional resources to do so. I was pleased that the Minister for Local Government and Planning wrote to local authorities at stage 2 to consult them on the potential impact of widening the bill’s definition. I believe that the majority of the issues that local authorities raised about that potential impact can also be addressed through the guidance that will be produced by the Government. I know that local authorities will be fully involved in that, and I welcome the minister’s confirmation that the initial meeting to discuss implementation earlier this week was a positive one. The main issue that cannot be addressed by way of guidance relates to the concerns that were expressed by some authorities about the potential for additional costs to be incurred in dealing with deciduous hedges. I am satisfied, however, that the bill provides that local authorities can charge on a cost recovery basis, and that the flexibility exists for different fees to be charged for different types of case, should local authorities choose to do so. That should enable local authorities to address any issues around additional costs should that prove to be necessary in practice. Taking all of that into account, I am happy to support Anne McTaggart’s amendment 5, and I urge all members to do likewise.

Does Mrs Mitchell agree that there is nothing in the current drafting of section 31A that would prevent a review from being carried out and a report from being published earlier?

Although I am grateful that Margaret Mitchell did not bring back some of the amendments that she withdrew at stage 2, I am nevertheless disappointed that she has sought to pursue these amendments. They seek to set a shorter timeframe for the review period that is set out in section 31A and for the period for making a report after review. They also seek to detail in the bill what should be scrutinised in that report. Section 31A was added at stage 2 following a committee recommendation for post-legislative scrutiny, and the committee’s unanimous recommendation was a five-year period. That is in the amended bill, and the member should know that the provision introduced by Stuart McMillan’s amendment is flexible enough to allow that period to be shortened should a future committee wish it to be. Section 31A provides that the review period shall end five years after the date on which section 2 comes into force “or on such earlier date as may be determined by the committee or sub-committee making the report”. It is therefore already the case that, if the future committee decides to do so, it may set a shorter timeframe for the review period. Section 31A also provides that a report “must be made no later than 18 months after the end of the review period.” Again, that means that the committee or sub-committee can make the report earlier if it so wishes. I am satisfied that section 31A gives a sufficient balance between the certainty that the legislation will be reviewed within five years and the flexibility for the future committee to make a judgment on when best to conduct its business. Amendment 4 seeks to ensure that any report on the operation of the legislation considers “the way in which local authorities have exercised their functions”, the costs that they have incurred in exercising those functions, “any issues arising from the meaning of ‘high hedge’” and whether the definition of a high hedge “should be amended to apply also to a row of two or more deciduous trees or shrubs.” As we have amended section 1 to allow deciduous trees to be included, the requirement in amendment 4 for the report to assess whether deciduous trees or shrubs should be included does not appear to make sense. For that reason alone, I ask Margaret Mitchell not to move that amendment. That also demonstrates the danger of trying to detail in legislation how a committee of the Parliament should go about its business. I am perfectly happy to leave the committee to determine for itself what should be in its report rather than impose prescriptive detail in legislation as is suggested by Margaret Mitchell. Section 31A is designed to guarantee post-legislative scrutiny of this new piece of legislation, and I am satisfied that it meets that purpose without any amendment. I therefore ask Margaret Mitchell to withdraw amendment 2 and not to move amendments 3 and 4. Otherwise, I urge members to resist amendments 2, 3 and 4.

Does Mrs Mitchell agree that amendment 4 would potentially set an alarming precedent of legislation prescribing what a committee of the Parliament should do as part of its workload?

I am delighted to open the debate, Presiding Officer. I am very pleased that Parliament has before it the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill, and I am delighted that we have this opportunity to put this new law in place to benefit people in Scotland. I am glad that there has been widespread support across the chamber for the bill. That much was apparent from early in the process, even before I introduced the bill, when my final proposal obtained cross-party support. I am grateful for the on-going interest, support and encouragement that I have received from fellow members—as well as for the casework, which has helped to shape the bill. The legislation will meet a clear need and desire expressed by people in Scotland in their engagement with Parliament on the issue. I have found that taking forward the legislation has been very rewarding, but I am conscious that this is not the first time that Parliament has considered high hedges and that legislation on the matter has a long history. Indeed, proposals for member’s bills on the issue were launched on three previous occasions, without those ever proceeding to be considered as bills. I am therefore pleased to be completing a piece of unfinished business. The then Scottish Executive consulted on the issue in 2000, although the number of responses was relatively small in comparison with the number received in response to a similar consultation in England and Wales the previous year. The more recent consultation undertaken by the Scottish Government in 2009 attracted in excess of 600 responses, of which 93 per cent were from private individuals, the majority of whom described themselves as being “in dispute”. Not surprisingly, a significant majority of respondents—77 per cent—favoured a legal solution to the problem, and more than two thirds favoured replication of the English and Welsh legislation. I am grateful to Fergus Ewing, who had already done a substantial amount of work on the issue when he had ministerial responsibility for the area, not least that of leading the work behind the 2009 consultation. That gave me a strong basis on which to build my own proposals. Both I and the officials working with me have met many people and organisations in the course of preparing for the bill and taking it forward, including the Scottish tree officers group, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the Scottish Court Service, the Scottish Mediation Network and the Woodland Trust. I also visited South Tyneside Council and Hartlepool Borough Council for a first-hand account of how similar legislation works in England, and met with the campaigning organisation Scothedge a number of times. The officials supporting me have met a further range of organisations, including the Scottish Wildlife Trust, RSPB Scotland, Scottish Natural Heritage and the directorate for planning and environmental appeals. We heard earlier that the Scottish Wildlife Trust and RSPB Scotland have recently written to MSPs to express their concerns about the inclusion of deciduous shrubs and trees in the bill, and I have acknowledged their concerns about the potential impact on wildlife and biodiversity. As I said earlier, I am satisfied that the guidance to be provided by the Government on the bill can address those issues and ensure that those potentially negative impacts do not arise in practice. I am therefore grateful that the minister has agreed that both the Scottish Wildlife Trust and the RSPB will be invited to participate in the drafting of guidance on the bill. I am happy, too, that Scottish Natural Heritage has already indicated a willingness to participate in developing the guidance, as it, too, has invaluable expertise to share. I am also grateful to the minister for ensuring that local authorities have been consulted on the potential impact of widening the bill’s definition of a high hedge. I know that many of the issues raised in response to that were considered at the Government’s meeting with local authorities on Monday to discuss implementation. One of those issues is the impact of the bill on woodland or forests, which Stewart Stevenson raised at stage 1. The short answer is that this is a bill about high hedges, so it is not designed to impact on woodland and forests, which as a general rule are not planted as hedges. I confirm that the Forestry Commission has been consulted during the bill’s progress, and I am sure that the issue can be clarified in guidance to practitioners. I now turn to the bill itself. It has become clear to me—I am sure that many members across the chamber will recognise this—that there are a number of apparently intractable disputes across Scotland that revolve around the presence of a high hedge, with no easy resolution in sight and no apparent willingness on the part of neighbours to resolve those disputes amicably. In my view, the bill is the best way in which to achieve a practical and sustainable resolution to a long-standing problem. I will now take a short time to explain the bill. The bill enables those who consider themselves to be adversely affected by the height of a high hedge to apply to their local authority for a high hedge notice. It gives those people an opportunity to put their arguments to an independent body and to have their voices heard, which is an opportunity that they do not have at present. It is important to note that an application must specify all the steps that have been taken to resolve the dispute prior to the application, and local authorities will be able to dismiss applications if that has not been done. The local authority will decide whether the hedge is adversely affecting the reasonable enjoyment of the applicant’s property. In doing so, it will take account of the views of the owner of the hedge and all relevant factors, including the amenity of the wider area. The bill’s definition of a high hedge has been the subject of much discussion. The bill as introduced mirrors the definition that is used elsewhere. It defines a high hedge as a hedge—that word is important in making it clear that the bill will not usually impact on forests or woodland—that “is formed wholly or mainly by a row of 2 or more evergreen or semi-evergreen trees or shrubs”, that “rises to a height of more than 2 metres” and that “forms a barrier to light.” The amendment that the Parliament has agreed to today widens the definition to include deciduous trees and shrubs by removing the restriction. The bill gives local authorities powers to make and enforce decisions about high hedges. They will be able to assess situations and make independent decisions on whether high hedges are affecting the reasonable enjoyment of properties. It is fair to point out, however, that the local authority’s decision will seek to strike a balance between the competing rights of neighbours, and the representations of both parties will be taken into account by the local authority. It must make a decision having taken all the circumstances into account, including the amenity of the wider neighbourhood, and if it finds that a high hedge is having an adverse effect, it must advise whether any action should be taken. Where the local authority decides that action should be taken, it will issue a high hedge notice. The notice will set out what initial action is required to be taken to address the adverse effect and what preventative action is required to prevent the adverse effect from recurring. The high hedge notice will also set out the timeframe within which action should be taken. The bill provides a right of appeal to the Scottish ministers against decisions by local authorities. In practice, appeals will be heard by the directorate for planning and environmental appeals, and it will issue full details of how that process will work in practice in due course. If an owner of a high hedge does not take the action that is specified in the high hedge notice, the local authority will have the power to enter the property and undertake the work itself. It will then be able to recover the costs of doing so from the hedge owner. In summary, the bill provides a mechanism for resolution. Recourse to the local authority is, however, to be used as a last resort. Primary responsibility for resolving disputes over high hedges should lie with the individuals concerned in the first instance. As I said, the bill requires that applicants for a high hedge notice must have taken all reasonable steps to resolve the matter before they make an application to the local authority. The success of that approach is borne out by experience elsewhere. In England and Wales, what started off as a large number of inquiries became a number of formal applications, which quickly became a small number of formal complaints and almost no instances of enforcement action. It is important to emphasise that the application to the local authority should be the last resort, not the first. The bill also provides for local authorities to charge for high hedge notice applications. In difficult financial times such as these, I consider it important to enable local authorities to recover the costs of making a decision. However, I made it clear at the outset that I do not intend the process to be a revenue raiser for local authorities, and the bill reflects my view. Fees must not exceed an amount that local authorities consider represents the reasonable costs of deciding on an application. Should a local authority undertake work in relation to a high hedge, it will be able to recover any costs in that regard as well. As I said, it appears from the figures that we gathered in respect of England and Wales that a large number of initial inquiries became a small number of formal complaints and even fewer cases where action by local authorities was necessary. That experience shows that simply creating a formal mechanism for resolving disputes encourages the resolution of most cases without the need for local authority involvement. At stage 1, Scothedge said that, with the passing of the bill, 92 per cent of the cases of which it is aware will resolve themselves. Local authorities can therefore have some reassurance that the costs associated with the process should not be too high and that the number of cases involved should be manageable. I was interested to hear all the evidence at stage 1. I took the opportunity to attend all the committee’s evidence-taking sessions. There was a lot of useful evidence from a number of organisations including Scothedge, the Woodland Trust Scotland, RSPB Scotland, the Scottish Wildlife Trust and Bell Ingram, and from officials from the Isle of Man, the Scottish tree officers group and Dundee City Council. We heard evidence that indicated that similar legislation is in daily use elsewhere and that there is no reason why the approach could not work in Scotland. The evidence also indicated that the existence of the legislation, rather than necessarily its enforcement, will resolve many of the problems associated with high hedges. Much of the discussion at stage 2 centred on the meaning and definition of a high hedge. That discussion continued today, and I was pleased to support Anne McTaggart’s amendment this afternoon. That amendment will widen the scope of the bill to ensure that it can deal with all hedges that are impacting adversely on the reasonable enjoyment of domestic property. At stage 2, members were also interested in the fee provisions, which I have described. I emphasise that the bill provides the flexibility for local authorities to set their own fee levels in accordance with local circumstances. A significant collective effort has got us to this stage, and for those who will implement the bill, the hard work is just beginning. I am aware that the Government held an implementation meeting on Monday in Edinburgh with local authority representatives and others. The meeting considered crucial matters, such as when the bill will be implemented, when local authorities will be ready to work with the provisions, what guidance for members of the public might contain, how members of the public might meet pre-application requirements, approach neighbours and make complaints and what the process would be thereafter. The meeting also considered what guidance for practitioners might contain, as it might also address the factors that a local authority might consider when making decisions. The intention is that the guidance will be developed over the next six months or so to enable local authorities to make the necessary financial and organisational changes to implement the new powers in the next financial year. I look forward to the legislation being fully in place and used effectively. I am therefore pleased—indeed, delighted—to move, That the Parliament agrees that the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I seek clarification, because I think that I heard the member suggest that single deciduous trees would be captured by the change of definition. That is not what will happen as a result of the change of definition.

I need to offer thanks to a number of people. First, I thank the members of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, which was the lead committee on the bill and which provided robust and thorough questioning and scrutiny as the bill progressed through stages 1 and 2. I thank, too, the Finance Committee, which robustly questioned me on the bill’s financial aspects, mostly through questions from the convener, Mr Gibson. I also offer thanks to the Subordinate Legislation Committee, which diligently examined and considered the subordinate powers in the bill, which led to amendments that have been agreed to. I thank all those who gave evidence to the committees—those who attended in person and those who took the time and trouble to write to the committees, often highlighting their own experiences. There are many people outside the chamber who perhaps did not submit evidence to the committees but who nonetheless showed a keen interest in the bill. I thank my assistant, Aissa Watson—who was highlighted by Kevin Stewart—who has, since I announced my intention to introduce the bill, been regularly fielding inquiries and suggestions from many members of the public and, indeed, many members of the Scottish Parliament. At the start of the process, the queries that Aissa dealt with were about what would be in the bill and what it would cover. The queries that she deals with now are about when the bill will come into effect. It is clear from the case load that she has developed over time that there is a huge amount of interest in the bill. I want to take this opportunity to thank to David McLetchie, who took an interest in the issue and was extremely supportive of my efforts at the outset, and who proved to be of great assistance in the early stages of consulting on the bill. It is appropriate that I put my thanks to him on the record. [Applause.] The debate today has been constructive and consensual. Sarah Boyack made the point in her opening remarks that not everybody will be happy as a result of the legislation’s coming into force. However, the point that she made—and which I have made repeatedly during the bill’s process—is that the bill is not intended to be anti-hedge legislation; it is pro-dispute resolution. In the resolution of any dispute, or any high hedge dispute, the outcome will be that one party will be viewed as the winner and the other will be viewed as having lost. However, the point of the bill is to find a way to resolve disputes, and we hope that local authority action will lead to that. I envisage that it is likely that the provisions will come into force—after local authorities’ guidance and implementation work has been undertaken—some time in early 2014. In essence, we are serving notice to those who are in dispute that there is, from now, a year for them to resolve their disputes amicably before the legislative remedy comes into force. I hope that that call will be heeded and that we will see many current disputes being resolved amicably. I felt that it was important to intervene on Margaret Mitchell earlier just to make it clear that single deciduous trees are not included in the revised definition, although the review section allows a future committee to examine the definition, should it so wish. I am grateful to Anne McTaggart for her constructive engagement during the bill’s passage and for being willing to discuss the best way in which to frame the amendment, which she later lodged, to ensure that it had the most impact. I welcome the fact that we have been able to agree the amendment that she lodged. Christine Grahame’s speech was as colourful as her speeches always are. In fact, we have been thinking about marketing her submission at stage 2 as a gardening book. We think that it could be a nice little sideline, given the expertise in horticulture that she demonstrated. However, she pointed out that I had a difficulty at the initial stages in weighing up which route to go down with the bill. Should I go down the route of the court-based solution that was mentioned during the debate, or should I go down the route of a local authority based solution? I felt that the latter would provide the best means of resolving disputes without their becoming snared up in legal process. Christine Grahame also made the point that people often purchase leylandii as a focal point without necessarily understanding the impact that they can have. When I launched the bill at the Mill Garden Centre in Armadale, Joe McIndoe, its owner, made it clear to me that he wants people to be given sensible advice about the impact that such plants can have when they come to purchase them. I hope that one thing that might happen as a result of the bill is that people will consider what they plant in their gardens and the impact that it might have on their neighbours. Stuart McMillan spoke about the review provision that he introduced. That was a sensible addition to the bill because it means that the efficacy of the legislation will be looked at, and that can include what has not been included but might be included in the future. As well as the issue of single deciduous trees, there are issues around the possibility of future fee-transfer mechanisms, which I know Margaret Mitchell wanted to talk about at various stages. It might be that we could learn from the example that exists in Northern Ireland. It will also be possible to look at what is in the legislation, how effectively it has worked in practice and whether changes or modifications are needed. Jackie Baillie made an important point. There has been some cynicism out there—believe it or not—about the worthiness of our debating the bill. Both Jackie Baillie and Kenneth Gibson brought to the chamber stories of individual cases that highlight to us the impact that situations can have on individuals. Some people out there might suggest that the bill is not worthy legislation for us to debate, but I would say that before they seek to be cynical about it, they should talk to people such as the constituents who contacted me during the progress of the bill, listen to their concerns and hear how happy they are made by the passing of the bill. I say to Kenneth Gibson that I was a bit worried when he started his speech that he might be heading towards a rather interesting editorial in the Buchan Observer, but I think that he managed to resolve the situation in that regard. [Interruption.] Stewart Stevenson is suggesting that he has already drafted a press release, so who knows? We might have some interesting discussions to follow. It has been clear throughout the process that a lot of people have campaigned on the subject for a very long time. I thank those who engaged with me during the process, particularly the members of Scothedge; I see some of them up in the gallery today. Not everybody whom I engaged with has been able to make it to Parliament today, but a number are here. It has taken a deal of resolve for the campaigners to pursue the matter because, as we have heard, there have been a number of disappointments for them along the way. There were a number of moments during the campaign when they thought that they were not going to see legislation coming into force; there were a number of false starts. The campaigners diligently kept pressing and kept coming back to try to ensure that Parliament not only took cognisance of their concerns but continued to pursue and advocate on their behalf, given the very real issues that they face. It is a great credit to Dr Colin Watson, who I see in the gallery today, and the members of Scothedge that they have continued to pursue the matter over a long time. I hope that they will be satisfied not just that the decision is being reached today, but by the way in which Parliament has conducted itself in coming to the decision, given the consensual nature of the process and the debate. Sarah Boyack highlighted that consensual nature, and it has been reflected in amendments having been accepted. Because of how the numbers stand, I could have simply rejected amendments from Opposition parties, but I thought that the most important thing to do was to listen carefully to the arguments that lay behind those amendments. That is why I was able to accept some of Margaret Mitchell’s amendments at stage 2, and I was pleased to be able to accept Anne McTaggart’s amendment and Stuart McMillan’s amendment at stage 3. Amendments have been accepted from across the chamber. The legislation has been a long time coming. Scothedge has always said that what it wanted to see in Scotland was better legislation than exists elsewhere. I hope that, today, we have done them justice.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will Gavin Brown give way?

3. To ask the Scottish Government how it ensures that people with acquired brain injuries receive appropriate treatment. (S4O-01927)

I recently visited Momentum in Aberdeen, which works with individuals who have an acquired brain injury. One concern that was raised was that individuals with an acquired brain injury often find it difficult to access appropriate support, as they often fall between the two stools of learning disabilities and mental health services. Will the cabinet secretary look into what can be done to ensure that appropriate treatment and support pathways are available to individuals with acquired brain injuries?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The member said that he, like the SNP, seeks nuclear disarmament. Why does his party portray the SNP as being the only party that threatens jobs at Faslane if he too wishes to see the end of nuclear weapons there?

Will the member give way?

I add my congratulations to Jackie Baillie on securing the debate. As members will be aware, dementia is an issue that is close to my heart—I will say more about that later. In addition, I have an interest in it as co-convener of the cross-party group on carers and of the cross-party group on dementia. I met Tommy Whitelaw in June 2011—on my birthday—in Aberdeen’s St Mary’s cathedral. It was quite a birthday present, Tommy. It is good to see him here in Parliament today. While we were there, we spoke about his campaign and I shared with him my family’s experience. My mother was carer to my grandparents. My grandmother had dementia for 11 years and lived with my mother in my mother’s home for six of those years, along with my grandfather, although he passed away in 2010. My grandmother passed away in October 2011. I agree with Jim Hume that dementia is a horrible, cruel illness. I have often said that my view is that dementia is an illness that kills a person from the inside out, in the sense that what you are left with is, essentially, a shell that looks very much like the person you know and love, but one from which the essence of that person, which made them the person you know and love, has long since disappeared, although occasional glimmers reappear. That was the case with my grandmother. I am deviating from my notes, but what was interesting with my grandmother was the way in which she would react to my children and my brother’s children—her great-grandchildren. She seemed to have an enormous affinity with babies and small children. She would always light up when they came to visit her, whereas she would treat my mother and her siblings as strangers, despite the fact that they were the children whom she had raised. I was always struck by that when I visited my grandmother. I saw at first hand the many difficulties that my mother faced as a carer. In the initial stages, she tried to juggle sustaining employment with her caring responsibilities. Eventually, she had to leave her job and focus fully on caring. Difficulties are created by the pittance that carers receive as a carers allowance. Jim Hume mentioned the £10.3 billion annual savings that the state accrues as a result of carers doing what they do. Despite that, the Department for Work and Pensions deems it not to be a job and pays a pittance by way of the carers allowance. That is extremely regrettable, and it certainly does not help carers to do the very tough job that they do. My mother received great support from Alzheimer Scotland throughout the process, for which she and my family remain grateful. Indeed, my mum is currently fundraising for Alzheimer Scotland, despite the fact that my grandmother has not been with us for more than a year, because we recognise the work that that organisation delivers across our communities. Jackie Baillie mentioned a carer in the Highlands who had been assisted by 104 care staff. Using my Poirot-esque powers of deduction, I concluded that she was referring to Jeanette Maitland of Kingswells in Aberdeen, who had 106 carers visiting to attend to her husband. I met Mrs Maitland at a carers event in Aberdeen and visited her at her home to discuss the issues prior to their becoming public. Jackie Baillie’s comments on that jogged my memory. That issue highlights the importance of continuity of care, particularly for individuals with dementia. One noticeable point is how such people react to familiarity and having the same person visiting them. Constant change upsets individuals with dementia, so it needs to be avoided. It is important to ensure that adequate and appropriate support is in place for carers. I note from a briefing that was provided for the debate that three quarters of carers say that their health is worse because of their caring responsibilities. We must address that; otherwise the people who are today’s carers will become the people who are tomorrow’s cared for.

Will the member give way?

Will Jenny Marra give way?

Jenny Marra contends that it is too soon to be having the debate. Does she not accept that for the hundreds of thousands of casualties it is not too soon, but far too late?

Presiding Officer, “Mine is the first generation able to contemplate the possibility that we may live our entire lives without going to war or sending our children to war.” Those are the words of one Tony Blair, addressing a North Atlantic Treaty Organization summit. How hollow and ironic those words sound to this day, when many families are missing children from their lives as a result of Tony Blair’s decision to drive forward with the war in Iraq. I hear arguments deployed in the chamber today that the ends have essentially justified the means and that it is okay that there were no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq because the Saddam Hussein regime was eventually overthrown. The idea that retrospective mission creep justifies a falsified prospectus and a blatant disregard for international law beggars belief. It will be cold comfort to those families whose loved ones are no longer with them, and to those communities that are missing individuals as a result of the war. People were sent to war on a false premise and that is seen to be okay—a reason has been invented for them to be there, and the intervention in the first place has been justified. That will give the families no comfort and it should give politicians no comfort either, however sincerely they might believe that the fact that Saddam Hussein was eventually overthrown means that we can sweep aside the lies and the untruths that were laid before Parliament and the country in order to justify the invasion, and that we can justify the huge loss of life on the basis of a retrospective explanation of the reasons for going to war. I do not think that that would do anybody any credit.

But it was entirely retrospective. At no point in advance of the invasion of Iraq was the overthrow of the Hussein regime used by those who were propagating the notion of war as a premise for invasion. Indeed, Tony Blair made a statement to Parliament in which he said: “I hate his regime—I hope most people do—but even now he could save it by complying with the UN’s demand.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 25 February 2003; Vol 400, c 124.] Up until the date of the invasion, Tony Blair himself was stating quite clearly that if Saddam Hussein complied with the demand to remove weapons—which we now know did not exist—that would somehow enable him to keep his despotic regime in power. I have no particular love for the regime that Saddam Hussein presided over. It would be folly for people to try to suggest that opposition to the war was by some definition an endorsement of the regime of Saddam Hussein. Those who put forward that argument do themselves no credit. I say to Mr Lamont that I agree that Iraq should not have had to bear the difficulties of the Hussein regime. It is also fair for politicians whose parties played a role in not just Saddam Hussein’s coming into power but his retention of power over the years to acknowledge it. The international community across the globe bears the burden of the flawed enemy-of-my-enemy-is-my-friend approach to international politics and foreign policy, which dominated the cold war agenda. Different sides in the cold war propped up despotic, despicable regimes in order to further their own foreign policy ends. Those who justify international intervention in a nation to enable regime change should remember that the reason why Chile ended up with Pinochet was international interference to instigate regime change. To say that somehow it is acceptable to intervene in another nation in order to instigate regime change flies in the face of not just international law but international precedent. On the juxtaposition of the constitution, I say to the Labour Party that I can stand here and quite rightly say that I believe that an independent Scotland would be better placed to take its own foreign policy and defence decisions. The Labour Party cannot say that that is outrageous when at the same time Labour politicians such as Dr John Reid will happily make blasé statements that an independent Scotland would provide a safe haven for terrorists. It cannot come here and claim moral outrage at our talking about the foreign policy agenda that an independent Scotland might pursue.

No. I am into my final minute. Kevin Stewart mentioned Allan Douglas from Northfield in Aberdeen. I too have stood at the Cowdray hall memorial in Aberdeen at remembrance Sunday events. I am the grandchild of a war veteran. My grandfather fought in world war 2—he served with the Gordon Highlanders in Burma—so I know the cost that war can bring to individuals and communities. Too many communities bear the scars of the Iraq conflict. There are too many children without mothers or fathers, too many parents without daughters or sons and too many families, towns, villages and cities ripped asunder by the impact of war. I will finish with another quotation from Tony Blair. He said: “sometimes it is better to lose and do the right thing than to win and do the wrong thing.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 9 November 2005; Vol 439; col 302.] If only he had applied that to the Iraq war, rather than the issue to which he was applying it—he thought that the right thing to do was detain people without trial for 90 days. Had he applied it to the Iraq war, we might not have had such devastating loss of life.

Will the member give way?

At this morning’s Health and Sport Committee meeting we had a discussion about the national autism strategy. It is timely that, following that discussion, we have this debate in the Parliament. I thank the members who supported my motion and who have remained in the chamber to listen to or contribute to the debate. The report, “Count us in: it pays to listen”, was launched by the National Autistic Society in the Parliament. The actor Richard Wilson, who is the patron of the National Autistic Society in Scotland, attended the launch, as did the minister and a number of members—including you, Presiding Officer; I know that you have previously chaired the cross-party group on autism. I think that all members agree that the reception was excellent and highlighted a number of issues that are raised in the report. In the report, four key priorities are identified that should be pursued at national and local levels. The first is sustained employment, and the Scottish Government is asked to “appoint an Autism Employment Ambassador to champion opportunities for people with autism in the workplace.” The report’s authors go on to say: “Local councils should map the need for employment support in their areas and include employment support for people with autism in their local plans.” The second priority is choice and control. The report’s authors say: “With effective transition planning and support after diagnosis, people with autism should be empowered to advocate for themselves. The availability of, and need for, independent advocacy services should be mapped across all services that people with autism need to access.” The third priority is challenging discrimination, and the report says: “The negative attitudes many people with autism experience are debilitating and must be challenged with a concerted campaign to raise public awareness and understanding of autism.” Finally, on professional knowledge and access to support, the report says: “Sensitively handled, the experience of getting a diagnosis and support to understand its implications can make a huge difference to personal happiness.” The Scottish Government is asked to consider a national health service health improvement, efficiency and governance, access and treatment target, to deliver post-diagnostic support. The report goes on to say: “Local authorities should invest in specific services that help address social exclusion and the challenges of self-advocacy among people with autism from across the spectrum”. On employment, 43 per cent of graduates or postgraduates with autism never achieve any sort of managerial position. Thirty-one per cent of people with a higher national certificate, higher national diploma, degree or postgraduate qualification are unemployed. Half the people with autism who were surveyed for the report have experienced career regression and are consistently failing to achieve the average earnings of their peers. Some 24 per cent have not had paid employment since they were 18, and 66 per cent rely to some extent on their families for financial support. Of the people who were surveyed, 53 per cent wanted support with employment, 39 per cent had lost a job due to their autism, 36 per cent said that they had experienced discrimination or unfair treatment at work and 55 per cent wanted help with developing social skills. From my discussions with individuals, at the reception and in the community, I have been interested to learn that people with autism do not need massive changes to be made to the workplace environment to enable them to sustain employment. Employers should take an active interest in considering whether they could do something in that regard. At Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body question time, I asked about accreditation for visitors to the Parliament, and I have spoken to local representatives of NAS about whether it would be worth having some form of accreditation or kite mark that employers could achieve, to demonstrate that they provide an autism-friendly workplace, not just on the customer-facing side of the business but for their employees. At the reception, we heard from Michael Clarkson, a gentleman with Asperger’s syndrome. He spoke of his experiences and his difficulties in finding a suitable job. It was interesting to hear him talk about his hobby and passion, which is cricket scoring, and his achievement of becoming a member of the International Cricket Council’s European scorers panel. His experience exemplifies the talents that people with autism and Asperger’s syndrome have, which could be utilised in the workplace if employers took a more sensitive approach. On choice and control, 91 per cent would like more say over the support that they receive; 66 per cent have not made use of an advocacy service; 16 per cent currently have access to advocacy; and 37 per cent would like advocacy support. It is important that what is being asked for here is, first, the ability to self-advocate where possible. Many people with autism and Asperger’s syndrome are perfectly capable of self-advocating. Where that is not possible, the ability to access advocacy services absolutely has to be available. On the issue of challenging discrimination, 79 per cent of those surveyed think that the public’s understanding of autism is poor or very poor, and 78 per cent of young people with autism think that people outside their family do not know enough about autism. Sixty-five per cent of young people with autism have been bullied at school; 33 per cent of adults have experienced bullying or harassment at work; and 36 per cent have experienced unfair treatment or discrimination at work. I will return to that issue in my closing remarks. On professional knowledge and access to support, 33 per cent say that it has taken three years or more to get a diagnosis; 42 per cent say that the process was too stressful; 27 per cent say that they have been misdiagnosed; and 6 per cent have paid to access diagnosis. Those who have spoken about autism, both on the record and to me, acknowledge that it is a great relief when a diagnosis arrives—not just to the individual but also to their family. They can then access the necessary support services that are available. We must do everything that we can to ensure that that diagnosis is both prompt and appropriate. I said that I would come back to the issue of discrimination. We entrust many of these targets to the Government. I know that the minister has taken on board the recommendations and fed them to the national reference group that he has established as part of the autism strategy. However, there is one target that falls not just on the shoulders of Government, but on the shoulders of us all. That is the issue of challenging discrimination. I was privileged to speak at the recent Aberdeenshire conference on autism, where I talked about addressing the societal perceptions that exist and the duties that we all have. I am a parent of an autistic child. My son is four and was diagnosed with autism when he was three. I have encountered the discrimination and difficulties that can arise because people do not understand autism. People give looks and tuts; they offer advice about how you should be looking after a child who is having an autistic meltdown that is, frankly, completely inappropriate. Other parents have experienced great difficulties, too. I heard about a wee boy who was the only child in his playgroup not to be invited to one of his peers’ birthday parties because of the way he behaves as an autistic child. Imagine the hurt and damage that that can cause children and their families. The challenge for us all, in all walks of life—whether as parliamentarians who have the privilege of being able to express our views to the organs of the press, or as individuals in our communities, talking to people and challenging stigmas and attitudes where they arise—is to ensure that discrimination about autism ends. We want to see a time when we do not need to campaign for understanding and acceptance of autism because people with autism are accepted, understood and recognised as the valuable part of our community that we all know them to be.

I rise to speak as a father of two children. I do not want it to be simply a political aspiration for Scotland to be the best place in the world for children to grow up in. All parents aspire to that for our children. I was interested that Mr Bibby’s speech focused on the need for reality to match rhetoric. He went very big on how we need to support children in our most vulnerable communities, but he may want to look at the reality of places in which his party has some locus of control. In my home city, for example, his party is currently in the administration in Aberdeen City Council and is consulting on closing Bramble Brae primary school. That school is situated in the Cummings Park community of Aberdeen, which is one of Aberdeen’s most deprived communities. Perhaps Mr Bibby should talk to his local councillors in Aberdeen and ensure that their reality matches the rhetoric that he is putting forth in the chamber. Along with Mr Doris, I am a member of the Health and Sport Committee, which has been undertaking an inquiry into teenage pregnancy. We are also about to embark on what I suspect will be a significant inquiry into health inequalities. One interesting point that came out of the scoping exercise for that is that the application of the word “health” is almost a misnomer because, in essence, we are dealing with an agenda around inequalities in income and educational outcomes. All those issues work together to produce the inequalities in society. In the teenage pregnancy inquiry, we have heard strong evidence on the benefits that have been realised in the family nurse partnership pilot areas. We have also heard great enthusiasm from the communities that are about to receive the benefits of the family nurse partnership when it is rolled out. Through that programme, the Government is taking an extremely strong step forward to support young mothers, who often need additional support at the beginning of pregnancy to help them as parents and to ensure that their children are given the most appropriate support. That is not to say that young mums are automatically bad mums—that is absolutely not the case—but it is a recognition that young mothers often need additional support early on to ensure that they become the best mums that they can be. There is a recognition that more needs to be done, which is why the Government is, in partnership, bringing forward the strategies and actions that the minister outlined, such as those on the early years collaborative, to ensure that we continue to deliver for Scotland’s young people. However, it is extremely depressing that, whenever we talk about our aspirations and ambitions, we find ourselves hitting against a glass ceiling of reserved powers, which in many areas have a direct impact on our wish to develop the kind of Scotland that we want. That is why I find it difficult when Labour members on the one hand talk about wanting to tackle child poverty, but on the other hand beg us not to have the full range of powers here in Scotland. To me, that is simply a rhetorical mismatch. I recently saw some internet traffic around supposed comments that had been made by a Labour Party spokesperson on the bedroom tax, so I looked at the “Daily Politics” interview with Helen Goodman MP. I encourage those Labour members who have not watched it to go and do so, particularly the point at which Helen Goodman says that the Labour Party has said that the bedroom tax should apply only in certain circumstances. To me, that is not being against the bedroom tax; it is being in favour of a different kind of bedroom tax. The Labour Party needs to have a look at that. There is a notion that our aspiration for the Parliament is that we should simply act to mitigate the effects of bad decisions that are taken at Westminster, whether by the current Tory-Lib Dem coalition or by the hypothetical future Labour Government that Mr Smith and his colleagues wish for. If Labour comes into government in 2015, Liam Byrne will have his hands on the controls of the welfare system, and he has said repeatedly that Labour will continue to cut the welfare budget if it wins the election in 2015. No doubt, if Labour does that, Mr Smith will tell us that we need to take action to mitigate those welfare cuts, rather than argue for us to have the powers here to shape a fairer welfare system for the people of Scotland. In my final minute, I will focus on the issue of additional support needs, which as members will know is extremely close to my heart. I have spoken to a number of parents in the north-east with whom I come into contact as a result of my son’s additional support needs. They told me about their aspirations, one of which is that “young people need to be nurtured, challenged and accepted in an environment that works together to support the whole child.” One parent said: “I consider myself and my son to be fortunate in that his needs were picked up and identified early on and a programme of early intervention is put in place.” I found myself in the same position. Early intervention is crucial, as is the ability to get the right support at the right time. We must recognise that welfare reform presents significant risks, especially for disabled children and other children with additional support needs. That is why I aspire to secure welfare powers for this Parliament. I do not want independence for independence’s sake; I want independence to make Scotland the best place in the world for children to grow up.

Will the member give way?

Does the member seriously contend that Scotland not having control of welfare or the taxation regime is compatible with removing child poverty?

Will the member give way?

Does Sarah Boyack regret that, in trying to get more money for local authorities, she led her party to vote against the order, which would have resulted in the local authorities receiving no money whatever?

5. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what work is being done to improve accessibility to the parliamentary campus for people with autistic spectrum disorder. (S4O-01860)

The member might be aware of the National Autistic Society’s process of accreditation, which the Northern Ireland Assembly achieved in 2012. That involved changes being made to the Assembly building, such as the provision of a quiet room, changes to signage and warning signs being placed on such things as noisy hand-dryers. It also involved the provision of training to front-line staff and the creation of autism champions. Is the SPCB looking at how it can work towards achieving accreditation for this establishment?

The member says that the Labour vision is to create more integrated services at the local level. I wonder how she squares that with the decision by her colleagues in Aberdeen City Council to establish a local authority trading company for social care, which the chief executive of NHS Grampian says will put at risk some of the benefits that could be realised from the integration of health and social care.

Gosh, Presiding Officer. How many times have I found myself being told at the end of a debate that I have three and a half minutes or two minutes or four minutes? Finally, there is a reward for patience. [Interruption.] Do not worry—this will be worth it. One phrase in the Labour amendment really stuck out at me, about the need to “avoid conflict between local authorities and NHS boards”. That interests me, because in my speech I want to explore one example of what is happening in practice where the Labour Party has some control. Yesterday, Aberdeen City Council voted to establish a local authority trading company for social care. Following previous votes on the business case at the full council, yesterday the council voted to take things one step further. That will involve the transfer of 750 staff, three care homes and occupational therapy and rehabilitation services to the new arm’s-length company, Bon Accord Care Ltd. Indeed, the council has also found within itself funding for the new trading company. Although it was interesting to hear Jackie Baillie talk about the need for tough choices being driven by budgetary pressure, the leader of Aberdeen City Council announced at the budget-setting meeting in February that there would be no cuts in the council’s budget. Clearly, that is due to, for example, a strong funding settlement from the Scottish Government and good stewardship of the council’s finances by the previous administration. It is interesting that a consultant has been hired as part of the establishment of the local authority trading company. The consultant will form part of the management team. Indeed, he is named as a director and sole shareholder in Bon Accord Care. The council will pay £42,800 for 12 weeks’ work—a pro rata salary of £170,000 a year, which is more than the chief executive of Aberdeen City Council is paid. When challenged about the expenditure, Len Ironside, the social care convener, said: “These are the experts—they have set up these types of companies before.” In effect, he is saying that it is because they are worth it. Many people in Aberdeen city would question whether the council should be spending that amount of money on a consultant to deliver social care services. However, there are not only concerns there. Indeed, the chief executive of NHS Grampian, Richard Carey, has stated his concerns that the “creation of the LATC does not prevent integration ... It does, however, restrict the range and nature of the partnership ... we have expressed concern to the council that the opportunities for integration to deliver best value through changing service delivery may be restricted. It is therefore not integration that is potentially at risk, but the ability of the eventual partnership to deliver the changes as required in reshaping care for older people ... The opportunity to look at innovative staffing models on a joint basis is severely restricted ... the LATC was described by the council as remaining ‘100% under council control but would compete in the marketplace, effectively selling services to people who can afford it and are willing to pay’. If there is an inability to recruit home care staff, the available hours of care should be directed towards those in most need, not those who can pay ... The ability to pool the budget and use resources flexibly across health and social care is impacted upon as the LATC plan involves issuing a 5-year contract for £26 million ... This will restrict the ability and flexibility of the partnership to reallocate resource to match the assessed needs of the population as described in the joint strategic commissioning plan. The flexibility normally associated with a contracting model of procurement is restricted ... Savings made or profits generated by the LATC shall either be redirected by the LATC to create other services ... or result in profits returned to the council ... It is difficult to visualise how this will enable the integrated partnership to make the savings necessary to generate additional capacity to support the increasing number of older people in the local population ... integrated partnership will be required to create a strong ethos of partnership not only between the NHS and social work service but also with the third and independent care sectors. We are very aware of the concerns being expressed by both the third and independent care sectors of the competitive nature of the LATC, and this may have implications for the partnership.”

That was not worth it. I am not reading out the minutes of Aberdeen City Council; I am reading out the deep concerns that the chief executive of NHS Grampian has about the behaviour of Duncan McNeil’s colleagues in administration in Aberdeen and the policies that they are pursuing. He would perhaps do well to pay attention to what Mr Carey has to say. In particular, let us listen to the response that was given by Willie Young, the finance convener of Aberdeen City Council, in response to Mr Carey’s concerns, who said: “I would say get off our lawn—I promise not to interfere with his business if he won’t interfere in ours ... They are actively undermining us at each and every opportunity”. However, the only thing that is being undermined is the ability of health and social care integration in Aberdeen to deliver the best results for the people of Aberdeen.

No, no, no. It is not only NHS Grampian that has concerns. Unison has said that it has “grave concerns that this will result in an erosion in the terms, conditions and pension entitlements of our members, and a two tier workforce.” There are other examples of local authority trading companies but, unfortunately, we must look outwith Scotland, because the only example that exists in Scotland is the one in Aberdeen. Perhaps that ought to be instructive. We can look at the situation in Barnet. A press release from Barnet Unison on 1 March said that despite the fact that staff were transferred under the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations, just more than one year on “170 staff will be presented with a redundancy consultation document”. That underlines what Unison in Aberdeen is saying about the situation leading to significant challenges and potential risks for staff in the future. However, that is not the only area in which there are issues in Aberdeen. My colleague Kevin Stewart wrote to the cabinet secretary in February about the emerging care crisis in the city, with 66 elderly and disabled who were assessed as requiring essential care but who were still on the waiting list for care from the council. The chief executive herself had to intervene in some cases. SNP group councillors made attempts to get the council to convene a care summit, including through a motion from my colleague Councillor Jim Kiddie that the Labour-led council would not even consider. Those developments are not a result of budgetary pressures, as Jackie Baillie claims; they are all about the political dogma of the Labour-led council. Labour in Aberdeen is using social care users as guinea pigs in a bizarre political experiment. It ought to think again.

As regards the Aberdeen project, the SNP said that we would look at the business case. The business case came back and it did not stack up, and so the project was opposed. It is a great pity that the Labour Party did not join us in opposing it and did not listen to the concerns that were expressed, not just by politicians but by trade unions as well.

13. To ask the Scottish Government what engagement it has had with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in relation to constitutional protection for local government in an independent Scotland. (S4O-01874)

The minister will be aware of the recent comments of COSLA president David O’Neill about constitutional protection for local government. Does the minister agree that that appears to indicate that some in the Labour movement are opening their eyes to the opportunities that independence will bring? Would it not be better if the Labour Party helped to inform the debate by setting out its stall to show what it would do with the powers of an independent Scotland?

I thank Mr Findlay for pointing out that the Presiding Officer had forgotten to call me. Sometimes I wonder what life is like in the world that Jackie Baillie occupies. I envisage it as a dank, dark and depressing place that is forever to be viewed through the prism of a half-empty glass. Meanwhile, those of us who live in the real world wonder why the Labour Party appears to have such a low threshold for a scandal. As the cabinet secretary pointed out at last week’s meeting of the Public Audit Committee, the Auditor General for Scotland stated quite clearly: “As we have said in the reports and as I have said today, we have not found any evidence of manipulation at all.”—[Official Report, Public Audit Committee, 27 February 2013; c 1238.] Indeed, in the key messages section of its report Audit Scotland states: “Our sampling found a small number of instances in which unavailability codes were used inappropriately.” However, what Jackie Baillie said would lead people to assume that the practice was widespread and that there were hundreds and thousands of examples beyond those that Audit Scotland identified. Jackie Baillie is simply going with supposition rather than evidence, which is what Audit Scotland presented at the Public Audit Committee. The BMA states clearly that it is satisfied that “The Audit Scotland report on waiting times in Scotland did not find any widespread manipulation of waiting times across the NHS Boards in Scotland.” Jackie Baillie hung herself out to dry when she claimed that the situation in NHS Tayside was an example of widespread manipulation of the figures. She should at least have the humility to accept that the reality does not match up to her rhetoric. Let us compare the situation with the one that existed under Labour. If the current situation qualifies as a scandal, one can only imagine how Jackie Baillie would have referred to the Labour Party’s record on the matter, when around 35,000 people were stuck on waiting lists with no waiting time guarantee and when no statistics were published on the length of their wait. That is a scandal—the situation that Ms Baillie reported as such is not. The notion that the Labour Party is putting across that everyone on social unavailability codes has been parked or put there inappropriately, which Jackie Baillie directly implied in her speech, is frankly untrue. There are perfectly good reasons why people find themselves socially unavailable. I could have been socially unavailable last year had the surgery that I required been available only in the months during which Parliament was in session. Luckily, I was offered an appointment during a recess period, so I could take it up, but it is quite feasible that I could have found myself being socially unavailable at that time. Dr Richard Simpson (Mid Scotland and Fife) (Lab) rose— In its briefing, the BMA clearly states: “It is important to recognise, however, that waiting times”—

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I thought that the understanding was that it was for the member who was speaking to determine whether to accept an intervention, rather than for Mr Findlay to use his tried and tested bully-boy tactics to muscle in on my speaking time. I hope that the Presiding Officer will give me a little bit of time back for that spurious point of order. The BMA also states: “It is important to recognise, however, that waiting times are not the only or the most important indicator of performance—patient outcomes, readmission rates, health care associated infections etc are also important indicators of the quality of care received. It is important not to lose sight of these in favour of throughput and patients being seen quickly.” Let us look at some of those statistics. Since 2008, there has been a 12.4 per cent reduction in hospital mortality, which equates to the saving of 8,500 lives. There was a 24 per cent reduction in the number of C difficile cases and a 10 per cent reduction in MRSA/MSSA cases in 2011-12. Between 2007-08 and 2011-12, there was a cumulative fall of 78 per cent in C difficile cases and 35 per cent in MRSA/MSSA cases. That shows that real progress has been made on hospital-acquired infections, which belies the rhetoric of Jackie Baillie, who tried to paint Scotland as the hospital superbug capital of Europe but forgot that she was referring to figures for when her party was in power. There have been 272,000 alcohol brief interventions to tackle harmful and hazardous drinking over the past four years. The emergency bed days rate for people aged 75 and over has reduced by 10.9 per cent since 2006-07, and 48,000 inequalities-targeted cardiovascular health checks were delivered in 2011-12. Scotland’s suicide rate reduced by 17 per cent between 2002 and 2011. Those are real results for real patients in Scotland. The BMA has been instructive in advising us to look at what lies behind the statistics. We should always remember that it is the outcomes for patients that matter. That is why it is important to look at and compare patient satisfaction ratings. We can never be complacent about the NHS because, as has been made clear, it is a human organisation and errors will occur. Indeed, even in the Labour Party, errors, such as bringing this debate to the chamber, occasionally occur. The task that we must face is to learn the lessons from the errors made by human organisations and understand how to put them right. The Labour Party’s real game was given away by its press release in advance of this debate. The aims are, first, to attack Nicola Sturgeon, because Labour recognises that she is quite rightly viewed as an asset not only to this Government but to the nation and, secondly, to save Jackie Baillie’s rapidly diminishing credibility after she overcooked the pudding on the NHS waiting time scandal. My advice to the Labour Party is that it should set itself more achievable targets.

I congratulate my colleague John Mason on securing this debate. In its national parenting strategy, the Scottish Government has set out its ambition to make Scotland “the best place in the world to grow up” and I think that we should all be striving to achieve that, not just for Scotland’s children but for Scotland’s families. We can make Scotland the best place in the world to grow up in partly by ensuring that children themselves grow up in a loving and nurturing environment. Part of that environment will be developed through stable relationships between parents, but we must accept that there will be situations in which relationships will break down, for whatever reason. The most important thing is that the children’s rights are considered, and that includes considering the rights of both the mother and the father. The father’s rights are all too often forgotten in the process. We absolutely have to put the child at the centre, but we must not forget that there are two other players as well, and the father often gets left out. Anne McTaggart helpfully summed up the range of family models that now exists in Scotland, none of which should be considered to be any less worthy than another, as children can be given a loving and nurturing environment in a range of ways. However, I want to focus on two specific groups. There are fathers who live with their partner and child. I am a father of two young children. I live with my wife and, obviously, we have our children with us. Those of us who are in such a position still need to be given support in the role of father. No father is ever handed an instruction manual on how to do the job, and support networks sometimes quite rightly in many ways focus heavily on the mother’s role and on directing support towards them. However, there can be times when the father needs to be given a bit of support in performing his role. How our public sector organisations include and seek to include fathers needs to be looked at. I will perhaps discuss that a little bit more a little later. There are also fathers who live apart from their partner for whatever reason. The most important issues in that context are around access rights and custody. I sometimes wonder whether, in looking at access rights, for example, there is still a harking back to the Victorian attitude of the distant father and the nurturing mother, as if fathers somehow do not really need to have access to their children because they do not take as active and interested a role. How we view fathers and the role that they play also needs to be looked at. On the wider support networks, obviously there is the support that can be provided through the public sector organisations. Voluntary groups have also been established, and groups of dads come together. Dads rock, which was in the Parliament recently, has established itself very well in Edinburgh and is now looking to branch out into other local authority areas. I told it to give me a shout when it comes to the north-east, although, given that it is based around a musical environment and I cannot carry a tune in a bucket, I do not suppose that I will be much help to it. Fathers of children with complex support needs and disabilities also need to be seriously considered, particularly fathers who live apart from and have only very limited access to those children. How we support those fathers in their role as a father and in providing the support that they can provide to their children in those circumstances needs to be looked at.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what role it has in the production of Healthcare Improvement Scotland’s inspection reports into the care of older people.(S4T-00263)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the recent press coverage relating specifically to the Ninewells hospital report. Will he confirm whether that was the first time that Healthcare Improvement Scotland has produced a single combined report from an announced inspection and its unannounced follow-up?

The report at the weekend pointed to changes that had been made prior to the draft report being finalised following feedback received from NHS Tayside. Is it normal practice for Healthcare Improvement Scotland to consult health boards with draft reports?

In Aberdeen City Council, Kevin Stewart and I had experience of a move to priority-based budgeting. Would he recommend that approach as one that public authorities should look at as part of the on-going process of public sector reform?

Will the member take an intervention?

It is a well-known fact that 74 per cent of statistics are made up on the spot. Anne McTaggart said that 50 per cent of the Scottish Government’s cuts are impacting on local authorities, which I am sure was news to her front-bench colleague Sarah Boyack, who has been telling us that the proportion is 83 per cent. That is perhaps proof positive that Labour’s figures on local government funding are a wee bit madey up. I congratulate the committee on the work that it has done on the area, which is a key challenge for us. Public sector reform should be regarded as not just a challenge but an opportunity to revitalise the delivery of our public services. On community engagement, I was struck that Graeme Downie from NESTA said: “Communities can be seen simply as those to whom services are done. Ironically, if you engage them at the earliest possible stage of policy development, you always end up with the best outcome.”—[Official Report, Local Government and Regeneration Committee, 28 March 2012; c 814.] That is certainly something that my colleague Kevin Stewart and I learned when we became part of the Aberdeen City Council administration. The way in which the council carried out its budget process did not take that engagement into account. In essence, figures were publicly available for two to three weeks in which there was a rush to find savings in order to make the budgets balance. Kevin Stewart, who was the finance convener at the time, took the decision to move back the process and engage with communities at a much earlier stage. As such, communities felt that they were involved in the budget process rather than it simply being something that happened to them. The resulting benefits were not only that communities felt more involved but that their suggestions often found their way into the council’s budgets. Community engagement is laudable, but it must also be tinged with realism. Communities will obviously want to have certain things, but those things cannot always be delivered. There must be a realism that communities cannot always get everything that they want out of a process. Most communities are realistic about that and they genuinely appreciate being consulted and having their views taken on board. Often, those views shape the policies and approaches that are taken. Partnership working and the shared service agenda are not only about spending less money. A lot of the work has been driven by the financial constraints that are being felt across the public sector, but the agenda is pushing something that could realise greater opportunities for much more efficient working and better outcomes for communities. A reluctance—a silo or protectionist mentality—exists in some services that is acting as a barrier; there is also a lack of genuine discussion on some of the approaches that are being taken. We have seen that happen in advance of the forthcoming health and social care agenda in Aberdeen. The local council proceeded with a local authority trading company for the provision of social care services. NHS Grampian has raised concerns about that and the impact that it could have on extracting the best possible outcome from the health and social care partnerships. The response from Labour Councillor Willie Young, Aberdeen City Council’s finance chair, to NHS Grampian to “Get off our lawn” does not strike me as the most mature way to carry out discussions between public bodies about how they realise the best possible outcome for public sector reform. I note that the committee unanimously supported the shift towards a preventative spending approach. Preventative spending, by definition, is about a transfer of resource. However, the transfer of resource in and of itself is not enough; we need a change of mindset and culture in our local authorities and public services about how they translate the shift in budget to a difference in how they deliver services on the front line. It is depressing when we see local councils turning down opportunities. For example, the administration in Aberdeen rejected the opportunity offered by the SNP group as part of the budget process to invest significant sums in education and early intervention within regeneration communities in favour of proceeding with the pedestrianisation of Union Street, which is something that, frankly, nobody in Aberdeen has been calling for. A lot of good work is being done. The committee certainly cannot be accused of not going out and looking for best practice and, when it finds it, reporting on it. We should build on that work where we can, but we also need to look at areas where there are blockages and work out what those blockages are. Far too often those blockages are about the mentality of the individuals involved, whether they are at the elected member or the senior officer level. Something needs to be done to instigate a culture shift in organisations to ensure that the people who need to take the decisions to move towards a much more cohesive agenda on public service integration are able to do so. Money is often the driver for decisions but, just because finances are tight and we are moving towards a preventative spend approach, that does not mean that that is a bad thing. There is a lot of opportunity as a result of the public sector reform agenda, and we must ensure that we capture it all.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what international diplomats it has met recently and what issues were discussed. (S4O-01799)

When the cabinet secretary next meets diplomats from Namibia and Togo, will she apologise for the sneering way that their nations were dismissed by Johann Lamont recently at First Minister’s question time? Will she also apologise to Denmark for the coalition Government’s sneering dismissal of that country in the papers recently and to diplomats in Ireland and Iceland for the “arc of insolvency” slur that has been propagated by Labour politicians? Will she join me in calling for the anti-independence parties to stop insulting other nations in order to undermine Scotland’s ability to govern itself as those proudly independent nations do?

Will the member take an intervention?

I know that Mr Carlaw was making a fleeting political point, but I will quote to him what Breakthrough Cancer Scotland said: “Breakthrough would suggest that rather than introducing a Cancer Drugs Fund in Scotland at this stage, when it is likely to have limited impact before the implementation of VBP”— value-based pricing— “in 2014, a thorough review of the effectiveness of current drug access system in Scotland is undertaken.” That review is under way. Melanoma Action Support Scotland stated that it does not want “a cancer drugs fund; treatment is required for other life limiting diseases too”, and MacMillan Cancer Support stated: “we do not support the introduction of a cancer drugs fund in Scotland”

The subject is emotive and, on emotive subjects, it is really important that we ensure that the words that we use are always carefully chosen. We must be careful about using the term “life-saving” when many of the medications about which we are talking are life-extending, rather than life-saving, medicines. We must be very careful when we use such terms in the chamber. I refer to the author Dr Ben Goldacre, who writes the “Bad Science” column for The Guardian and has also written a book called “Bad Pharma: How drug companies mislead doctors and harm patients”. In that book, he says: “Sometimes ... a deceptively simple explanation for a complex phenomenon can be very powerful; it can prime the reader to accept a specific treatment, but it can also change our whole cultural understanding of a disease.” To illustrate that point, he examines the media coverage about herceptin. Much of that coverage took place before the drug had even been submitted to NICE and any of the clinical data was in the public domain. However, there was already a concerted media campaign for NICE to approve herceptin. I will focus some of my speech on that point. While we are talking about the availability of medicines, we must focus on a stark point, which relates to trials and clinical data. A briefing that I have received says: “The current best estimate is that half of all the clinical trials that have been conducted and completed have never been published in academic journals, and trials with positive results are twice as likely to be published as others. This figure comes from a systematic review conducted in 2010”. If we are to discuss seriously the availability of medicines, we must do so on the basis of all the available data that relates to the medicines that we are discussing—otherwise, we will fail patients and the public. The briefing that I have received also says: “We are not aware of any UK legislation requiring the results of all trials on all drugs in current use to be made available. There is legislation requiring disclosure of adverse events and other monitoring of clinical trials within the UK, and regulation for ‘good clinical practice’ in the conduct of trials, by the MHRA. This legislation does not address biased under-reporting of clinical trials and should not be confused with the issue of missing results.” I signed up today to the all trials campaign, which calls for the results of all clinical trials to be published, regardless of what those results are. A huge number of individuals have signed up; I will quote just one, because time is limited. The campaigner Lynn Faulds Wood said: “good information about drug performance & trials means life or death to many patients but we are frequently not getting it. It is appalling that pharma companies can choose how much to tell us & hide results they don’t like.”

I hope that all members will back the all trials campaign to ensure that, when we discuss the availability of medicines in the Parliament, all the information is available to us. The position of rare conditions is disanalogous, because the patient cohort for such conditions is so tiny that the likelihood of medicines being affordable is virtually nil. That has been borne out in evidence to the Health and Sport Committee.

The rare conditions fund does not provide an analogy that can be applied to conditions that have a much wider patient cohort.

Will the member give way?

Does Jackson Carlaw accept my earlier point that we cannot legitimately talk about benefit to patients without there being available all the trial data relating to medicines? That is why it is so crucial that all trial data for all medicines be made publicly available.

Mr Macintosh will know that, of the consequentials that the Scottish Government has received, some £19 million is earmarked for the further and higher education sectors. Does he stand by his comments in the stage 1 debate, when he said that he would take that money back and allocate every penny of it to the housing sector?

Will the member give way?

Richard Baker makes it sound as though a £7 million increase in the face of inflationary pressures is something for which we should be grateful. Perhaps he would like in the remainder of his speech to reflect on the following question: if the college budgets in Scotland are being cut “dramatically”, what is the situation in England? That situation has, of course, a direct bearing on the funding that is received by the Scottish Government?

Thank you very much, Presiding Officer. I welcome you back to your place. It is good to have you back in the Parliament with us. I am pleased to open the debate on the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill. I thank the Local Government and Regeneration Committee for its detailed and thorough consideration of the bill, in which it was supported by the Subordinate Legislation Committee and the Finance Committee. I am also grateful for the support that ministers have given me in taking the work forward. It is the furthest that any high-hedge proposals have got in the history of the Parliament, and a great deal of work has gone into the bill to get us this far. I and those supporting me have met a number of people and organisations from throughout Scotland and elsewhere. Tony Dixon from Hartlepool Borough Council and Simon McGinnety from South Tyneside Council, both of whom I met in December 2011, were able to give me a great deal of assistance in understanding how high-hedges legislation has worked elsewhere. Ian Edwards, Elspeth Forsyth, Steve Milne, Robert Paterson and Eric Hamilton from the Scottish tree officers group provided me and the officials supporting me with much expertise and advice—I hope that they will continue to do so. I thank Joe McIndoe, the owner of the Mill Garden Centre in Armadale, West Lothian, who kindly allowed me to use his garden centre as an excellent venue for the launch of the bill last October. I am also grateful to Scothedge, which has campaigned for such legislation for many years and which has engaged positively with me throughout the process. I make it clear at the outset that the bill is not an attempt to define the height of every hedge in Scotland. Many people who own, or live adjacent to, a high hedge will have no issue at all. I seek not to create disputes were none exist but to resolve existing ones. It is clear that a number of intractable disputes revolve around the presence of a high hedge. The problem is that there is no way to resolve them if there is no willingness to do so amicably. By introducing the bill, I have sought to provide a mechanism to remedy that. The Scottish Government consulted on the matter in 2009. That consultation gave an indication of the extent of the problem. There were more than 600 responses, 93 per cent of which were from private individuals, many of whom described themselves as being in dispute. The bill aims to provide an effective means of resolving disputes about the adverse effects of a high hedge where the issue has not been amicably resolved between neighbours. It acknowledges that the individuals involved should have primary responsibility for resolving such disputes. The bill defines a high hedge. The definition largely mirrors the one that is used elsewhere, and I am pleased that, in the stage 1 report, the majority of the committee agreed with the definition. I will refer to that report a little later. The bill gives home owners and occupiers a right to apply to a local authority if it is considered that a high hedge adversely affects the reasonable enjoyment of property. However, although the bill provides a mechanism for resolving disputes, it also provides that pre-application requirements must be met. That means that applicants must have taken all reasonable steps to attempt to resolve the dispute beforehand. Recourse to the local authority should be the last, not the first, resort. The bill empowers local authorities to make and enforce decisions about high hedges. It gives them powers to assess the situation and act as an independent and impartial adjudicator of whether a high hedge is affecting the reasonable enjoyment of property. We must bear it in mind that that means that local authorities will seek to strike a balance between neighbours’ competing rights. Authorities will also need to consider a hedge’s effect on an area’s amenity and whether the hedge has any cultural or historical significance.

I received the letter that Bruce Crawford sent me. It is worth stressing that any decision about action that is to be taken will be the preserve of the local authority officer who assesses the situation. No hedge will be too high to be included in the bill’s scope. I have included a trigger height beyond which hedges can be considered, but there is no maximum height to which the law will apply. The English legislation talks about not requiring hedges to be reduced below a certain height, and it prohibits the removal of hedges. I have not inserted such a provision in the bill, because it is important to give priority to professional expertise. It should be up to the tree officer to make the decision. Once an assessment has been made, a local authority may issue a high-hedge notice. The notice can set out what needs to be done to address the problem and prevent it from recurring. It can also specify a reasonable time in which the initial action is to be taken, and it may provide for a longer time for preventative action to be taken—that will depend on the circumstances. Should the hedge’s owner not undertake the work that is specified in the notice, the council will have the power to enter the property, undertake the work and recover the costs of that work. An appeal process will be available to allow appeals to be made to the Scottish ministers. In practice, the directorate for planning and environmental appeals, which has experience of similar appeals to those that are proposed, will decide the appeals on ministers’ behalf. I came to the issue with an open mind on how such situations should be resolved. I pay tribute to Fergus Ewing, the previous Minister for Community Safety, for the work that he did to bring us to the current stage, which gave me a sound basis on which to build and from which take things forward. I came to the view that we needed a straightforward means of resolution, which meant empowering local authorities to take action should the problem be particularly difficult to resolve. Such a path has been followed elsewhere. I investigated that option directly with local authorities in England, and the information that they gave me provided reassurance that the problems could be resolved. The approach provides a degree of certainty that costs will not be excessive. It also ensures that the problem that the hedge causes can be tackled in a relatively straightforward way.

I am just about to talk about the committee’s report. I would be absolutely happy to accept such an amendment if Mr McMillan was minded to lodge one; otherwise, I would have done so. I would also be happy to discuss with him how best to frame that amendment. I am pleased that a majority of the committee was content with the definition of a high hedge as set out in section 1, and I am even more pleased now that Mr McMillan has indicated his willingness to lodge an amendment that would satisfy some of his concerns. I am aware that a number of people who responded to the committee’s call for evidence addressed that point. Some evidence suggested that the definition should be broader and some evidence suggested that it should be narrower. I think that the committee’s majority conclusion is the right one and that the bill strikes the right balance. On the basis of my discussions with local authorities in Scotland and elsewhere, I think that the definition should mean that the costs that are associated with implementing the bill should not be excessive and that the numbers should not be unmanageable. In its report, the committee asked for clarification of instances “where a local authority is considering an application where one or more of the properties concerned in the application for a high hedge notice are owned by the local authority.” I am happy to confirm that the bill requires only that a high hedge must be on land that is owned or occupied by someone other than the applicant for a high-hedge notice. Otherwise, there are no such restrictions on the location of the hedge. The hedge could be situated on land that is owned by the local authority. Nothing in the bill prevents a high-hedge notice from being issued against a local authority. Indeed, the appeal process builds in a further safeguard, should there be dissatisfaction with the outcome of any adjudication in that regard. I am happy to agree with the committee’s recommendation that the bill should be amended to include the national park authorities as statutory consultees. That request was made by one of the national parks and was supported by the Scottish tree officers group in its written submission. The committee also recommended that a review provision be included, on which Mr McMillan helpfully suggested that he would seek an amendment. I am happy to take that forward. I noted the committee’s conclusions in respect of the provision in section 34, the intention of which is to allow the current meaning of a high hedge that is contained in section 1 to be amended by regulation. I also noted the Subordinate Legislation Committee’s different interpretation of the width of the power in section 34. It expressed the view that “it appears to be possible for that power to be used in the future so as significantly to alter the scope of the Bill”. I am keen to hear the members’ views on that provision in the debate, following which I will consider what action might need to be taken. As part of that process, I will assess how addressing the points that the committees have made might impact on the bill. I will give further consideration to the matter and will contact both committees to confirm my intentions ahead of stage 2. The Local Government and Regeneration Committee noted the concerns that were expressed in evidence about how the bill’s provisions relate to tree preservation orders. I said in my evidence that in circumstances in which a tree preservation order might be in place, high hedges would be “dealt with through a pragmatic approach, which will not be frustrated by other legislation and will ensure that protections for valuable trees are kept in place.”—[Official Report, Local Government and Regeneration Committee, 19 December 2012; c 1570.] I am glad that the committee is satisfied with that approach. That is welcome. The committee is also content with the provisions that require local authorities to set fees at a reasonable level. As drafted, those provisions mean that a fee that is fixed by the local authority “must not exceed an amount which it considers represents the reasonable costs of an authority in deciding an application”. That gives local authorities sufficient flexibility while still allowing them to recover costs. I thank Scothedge for its campaigning work in bringing about the bill. I welcome the attendance of so many MSPs and members of the public for the debate, which demonstrates the strength of feeling that exists on the issue. I am delighted to say the words that so many people have waited to hear being said in the Scottish Parliament: I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill.

The evidence from down south is that, although many councils thought that they would have to appoint specific high-hedge officers, they discovered that the officers who were already in the local authorities could deal with the work and that there was no need to bring in additional resource. I hope that that gives the member some comfort.

The debate has been fairly constructive. I found myself cringing at the number of hedge puns that were made—who knew that we had so many comedians in the chamber? We heard from Colin Keir and Helen Eadie that the issue was prevalent in their time as councillors. One of my motivations for pursuing the bill came from having been a councillor and having felt the frustration that there was no point of last resort for many such disputes. Let us consider some of the issues that have been raised in the debate. The first one that we should spend some time on is the definition that is used in the bill. Some members asked why I did not widen the definition. Kevin Stewart and Stewart Stevenson helpfully referred to the experience in the Isle of Man. Its system is not entirely analogous to the one that I have proposed—the Isle of Man has pursued the issue in a different way—but we should look at the experience there. The assessments that are required for deciduous vegetation are often highly complex. The fact that a 12-month inspection process is necessary to establish the impact of a particular tree or group of trees must be built in as a cost factor. That could be recoverable by the local authority, so it could lead to the attachment of a substantial fee. My view is that we need to allow the legislation to bed in and to look at how the fee system works in practice before we can look at the possibility of widening the bill’s scope. I will come to that later in my speech. I am grateful for Stuart McMillan’s having expressed his willingness to look at how a review mechanism could be incorporated in the bill. I think that that is entirely sensible for the reason that I have outlined. It is not just the definition that we would look to review. We have spent some time talking about the definition, but there are other aspects of the bill—for example, those to do with the fee system and the appeals process—that it would be worth looking at to ensure that they are working in the way that we envisaged. I say to Christine Grahame that it is my understanding that privet would be captured by the bill, by virtue of its being evergreen or semi-evergreen, depending on where it is, but I am happy to look into that further on her behalf. Beech has characteristics that led me to feel that it should not be included in the scope of the bill, but I will be happy to reflect on that, to talk to her and perhaps to write to her after the debate to provide her with a little more detail. In listening to some of Anne McTaggart’s and Helen Eadie’s comments, I was concerned that the position that Labour had taken in committee to back the proposed definition seemed to be changing substantially. I have outlined why I drafted the definition in the way that I did. I will listen to members’ points, but they must accept that a change to the definition will have a knock-on effect on other aspects of the bill. The definition cannot simply be viewed in isolation. The fee element—which I am about to come on to—is a big part of that.

I take Margaret Mitchell’s point, but that leads me on to the issue of fees. The minister was quite right when he said that the mechanism for which the bill provides was not intended to be a revenue-raising mechanism for local authorities. Indeed, the evidence from south of the border is that it would be particularly foolish for any local authority to assume that it could use it as a revenue-raising mechanism, because the experience there has been that an initial flurry of inquiries leads to a much smaller number of formal applications, which, in turn, leads to an even smaller—a minuscule—number of occasions on which the local authority requires to take action. I think that that bears out the comments by Colin Keir and Graeme Dey that the bill, simply through its existence as a piece of legislation, will regulate people’s behaviour. It will mean that, when an assessment is required and a remedial notice is served by an authority, people will take it seriously, will take the necessary action and will not seek to frustrate the process. I have made it clear that I believe that it is for local authorities to determine what fees they will apply. The bill simply gives local authorities the ability to recover their costs. Some local authorities might choose not to do that; they might choose to structure their fees differently, depending on factors such as people’s incomes. That will be for local authorities to determine. In my time as a local councillor, if I had constituents beating down my door because they could not afford to access a particular council service, that would have led me to ask questions of the authority. There is that element, too. Council committees and councillors will ensure that any fee system that is put in place does not prohibit their constituents from accessing the process. On the fee-transfer argument, I acknowledge the comments of Christine Grahame. Margaret Mitchell and her colleague Gavin Brown pursued the issue with me at the Local Government and Regeneration Committee and at the Finance Committee. We looked at the Northern Irish example, but it is still very much in its infancy and there are not a lot of data to establish whether the scheme has succeeded. I still retain a concern that with a fee-transfer mechanism we run the risk of adding to a dispute; for example, a neighbour would receive a remedial notice and comply in full with it, but would then be asked to pay a surcharge to cover the fee that their neighbour had paid. There is a potential risk of animosity being created in that circumstance. Again, though, I have said that I would look at the fee-transfer issue. If members want to lodge amendments in that regard, I will consider them. However, at the moment, I remain unconvinced about a fee-transfer system.

I am very grateful for that, Presiding Officer. I take on board Christine Grahame’s point, but my earlier remarks in relation to how cases break down south of the border imply that local authorities never have to do that. We managed to find only one example of a local authority’s having to do the work and recover the costs. In Christine Grahame’s example, that would have kicked in a fee transfer. On the subordinate legislation recommendations, I take on board the points that were made by Sarah Boyack, Christine Grahame and Stewart Stevenson, who made a helpful and constructive suggestion in his speech. I have said that I will take a further look at subordinate legislation, particularly in the light of the issue around a review clause, and I will consider how those two elements of the bill would interact with each other. I am happy to reflect on that. Finally, a couple of myths need to be busted. There is no such thing, under the bill, as a too-tall hedge. Anybody who remarked that a hedge would be too tall to be tackled as a result of the bill has got the wrong end of the stick. There is a 2m trigger height, at which point any dispute can be considered, but I have made no stipulations beyond that. My colleague Bruce Crawford made a point in his earlier intervention about the notion that there is a provision down south that they can trim only to a certain height or that they cannot take action that might lead to the removal or destruction of the hedge. I want to leave it to the expertise of the professionals; if the only way to deal with an issue is to remove the hedge, It should be open to the individual tree officer to recommend that option in his assessment. The debate has been constructive and I have much to reflect on for stage 2. I am sure that members will be more than happy to offer input to that process. I look forward to the continuing debate on the bill.

Will the member give way?

I care about child poverty in Mexico, for example. Is it Drew Smith’s contention that I can care about that only if we are in a political union with Mexico?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Mr Chisholm says that the best way to defend the welfare state is to elect a Labour Government. In 1997, he resigned as a minister because Labour was cutting benefits. It was doing so by following the plans of the Tory Government from which it took office. Is there not an issue there about learning the lessons of history?

First of all, I declare that my family are child benefit recipients. I want to touch on a few issues that have arisen in the debate. I think, for a start, that my colleague Jamie Hepburn dealt very well with the accusation that the Scottish Government is “doing nothing” when he outlined the policy areas where it has taken action. I should also point out that it is trying to ameliorate the harmful impact of the coalition’s welfare reforms through the introduction of the Scottish welfare fund, the commitment to plug the gap in council tax benefit and the announcement of £5.4 million for benefits advice groups. All those actions demonstrate the Government’s commitment. Beyond that, the social wage, which comprises the universal benefits that the Government is committed to maintaining, is absolutely about helping those in poverty as well as wider society and the promotion of social cohesion.

No, thank you. As colleagues have pointed out, in order to create social cohesion we need to normalise the benefits system to ensure that it is not seen as something just for poor people, and to engender respect for it among the middle and upper classes. With regard to the lessons of history, I return to the point that I made to Malcolm Chisholm. When, in 1997, the Labour Party came to power following Tory Government, it chose to implement, instead of reverse, benefits cuts that the Tories had planned in their budget. I therefore say: fool us once, shame on us. As for fooling us twice, I say to Mr Chisholm that I do not think that Labour will get that opportunity. I hope that the Scottish people will see through all that when it comes to the vote in 2014. On the argument that the SNP has suddenly realised that this is all about social justice and not national identity, I will say that I care deeply for all the people who live in Scotland, regardless of their nationality. To be frank, it is absurd to claim that the independence cause is defined by national identity. I want a country where people from all over the world want to base themselves and live because it is a fairer and more prosperous society. National identity does not matter a jot to me; this is about building a better Scotland for all of the people of Scotland, irrespective of their nationality. I tried to intervene on Willie Rennie, but he is obviously not in the mood for a debate today. I wanted to ask him about budget impacts, because in last week’s debate on the budget bill I told him to go away, have a look at the UK budget’s impacts on income groups in society and come back and tell Parliament what he had found out. Mr Rennie clearly did not do his homework.

No. Luckily, I have the information that Mr Rennie should have been looking for. I will quote to Mr Rennie from the Institute for Fiscal Studies budget analysis for the 2012-13 budget: “The largest average losses as a fraction of net income from the modelled tax and benefit reforms to be introduced in 2012-13 are among those in the bottom half of the income distribution. The lowest-income fifth of households will lose about 1.5% of their net income from these reforms, on average.” It goes on to say: “Households towards the bottom of the income distribution lose out particularly from the lower benefit rates that arise from using the CPI to uprate them rather than the RPI or the Rossi index, from the time-limiting of contributory Employment and Support Allowance ... to one year for those in the Work-Related Activity Group ... and from the cash freezes to Child Benefit and Working Tax Credit amounts.” Let us hear no more from Mr Rennie that the Tory-Lib Dem budget—

No. Mr Rennie can deal with the point in his closing speech. Let us hear no more about how the budget that is being put forward by the Tories and the Lib Dems at Westminster is somehow helping those at the lower end of the income groups. It is not helping them; it is detrimental to them. What have the Lib Dems chosen to rebel on in order to show the difference between them and the Conservative Party? Is it the dismantling of the NHS? No. Is it tuition fees of £9,000? No. Is it benefits destruction? No. It is boundary changes. That’ll show them. That is the reality of the Liberal Democrats in Government; they are unwilling to stand up on points of principle and far too willing to stand up on points of self-preservation. In terms of the Tory arguments, Alex Johnstone continually referred to increased borrowing costs. I know that he is, as a farmer, well used to the construction of straw men, but even he should acknowledge that his own Government is now going around telling people that credit ratings are not the be-all and end-all and that they are not all that they are cracked up to be, in anticipation of the fact that the UK Government is likely to lose its AAA credit rating in the not-too-distant future, purely as a result of the ruinous economic policies that are being pursued by the chancellor, whom he supports. Alex Johnstone cannot come to this chamber and start bandying around the notion of credit ratings and increased borrowing costs when his own chancellor is putting that very rating at risk. The child benefit reforms are, to be frank, a guddle. There is no other way of putting it. The proposal is the most bizarre way to construct any form of benefit. There is the fact that it does not distinguish between single-income and double-income families, which means that a single parent on £60,000 a year loses their entire child benefit, while a couple who earn £49,000 each will retain theirs. Then there is the high-income child benefit charge. Rather than simply stop or reduce the payments for parents who earn more than £50,000, they will instead be clawed back by forcing those people to go through a self-assessment tax return. It is less a child benefit now and is more a child paperwork-intensive interest-free mini-loan. They should be ashamed of themselves.

I was in coalition with the Liberal Democrats for five years, so what do you expect?

Does Liz Smith feel that the benefits system should be used as a means of deficit reduction? Does that not undermine the notion that the benefits system should be constructed on the principles of fairness?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the proposed so-called bedroom tax reductions to housing benefit will have on Scotland’s housing associations and local authorities. (S4O-01735)

With reference to the impact on families, a report went to last week’s meeting of Aberdeen City Council’s housing and environment committee on the impact on kinship carers. Regarding underoccupancy, the report states: “Rules for kinship carers are not so straightforward. Kinship carers of a not looked after child will not be affected but for those of a looked after child it will depend on whether or not the child counts as part of the family ... The legislation is complex and in the absence of a test case or clarification from the UK government, interpretations vary.” Does the cabinet secretary agree that we urgently need clarification from the UK Government, given the huge impact that that could have not just on kinship carers but on the ability to recruit kinship carers in the future?

As part of that, will the minister consider issues to do with postnatal depression and its diagnosis? Postnatal depression can have an impact on attachment, which can lead to the disruptive behaviour to which he referred.

I understand the point that the member makes. However, such problems also often arise as a result of parental mental illness. Does the member agree that categorising the cause as “poor parenting” does a disservice to those parents who suffer poor mental health?

I associate myself with my colleague Kevin Stewart’s remarks about our former council colleague, Jim Kiddie. Having spent five years in the Aberdeen council chamber, we know that anybody who ever listened to Councillor Kiddie speak on mental health—and, indeed, on his personal experiences, about which he is extremely candid—could not have helped but have the hairs on the back of their neck raised. Councillor Kiddie emphasised to me early on—it has stayed with me since—that mental illness can affect anybody at any stage of their life, irrespective of their status or, indeed, their general health and wellbeing. I want to cover a number of different areas. I have a lot to get through, so I hope that I can manage that within the six minutes. The first of those areas is parental mental health, which I raised in a couple of interventions. That extremely important issue needs to recognised. I pulled up Nanette Milne on the use of the phrase “poor parenting”, and she accepted that that was poor phraseology. However, at the same time, there is a perception that child mental health or behavioural issues stem from poor parenting. Sometimes that is the case, but often they are a consequence of attachment issues that develop as a result of parental mental health issues, including, but not exclusively, post-natal depression. Post-natal depression affects around 10 to 15 per cent of women. It is estimated that, for every 1,000 live births, 100 to 150 women will suffer a depressive illness. Studies have estimated that around 10 per cent of fathers can develop and suffer from symptoms and effects of post-natal depression; that should be borne in mind. I noted a 2008 report, “The Effectiveness of Interventions to Address Health Inequalities in the Early Years: A Review of Relevant Literature”, which suggested further “exploration of interventions that reduce risk for postnatal depression”. That is because it is recognised that that has an impact on the mental health and wellbeing of children in the early years. I would welcome comments from the minister on how the Government sees post-natal depression fitting into the mental health strategy, particularly with regard to the application of the Edinburgh scale for post-natal depression. I understand that the expectation is that all women should receive the Edinburgh scale. However, I have anecdotal evidence that some women, who have later been diagnosed with post-natal depression, were not given the Edinburgh scale to complete. That might not be widely prevalent, but perhaps the need to take cognisance of the Edinburgh scale needs to be re-emphasised to either health visitors or GPs—or, indeed, to both—when it comes to looking at women and women’s health postpartum. I want to look at environmental factors, and a number of colleagues have spoken about welfare reform and the wider recession. The March 2012 report “GPs at the Deep End: GP experience of the impact of austerity on patients and general practices in very deprived areas” makes for sombre reading: “A central concern of the Deep End practices is the number of patients with deteriorating mental health.” Two ends of the spectrum were looked at. At one end, there are “those who are in work, and previously well” who found themselves under increasing stress in their jobs due to potential cutbacks and job security fears, and under the stress of taking on extra work or jobs, with the “resultant impact on family and relationships”. At the other end of the spectrum, there are “those with chronic mental health issues and established physical problems who are ‘deemed fit to work’ and have their benefits cut. Those people are “struggling to make ends meet ... increasing contact with GPs and psychiatry ... increasing antidepressant/antipsychotic use ... self-medicating with drugs and alcohol”. A number of testimonies were borne out in the report. One GP said: “I observe this again and again that I cannot address medical issues as I have to deal with the patient’s agenda first, which is getting money to feed and heat.” Another said: “In my surgery I am hearing from patients who for 2-3 days a week cannot afford to heat their houses (many use metered cards which are more expensive than direct debit payments).” Then there was a kind of gallows-humour comment: “For obvious reasons, the patients in X ... area ... call Corunna House [where the Work Capability Assessments are done] ‘Lourdes’ because all the sick come out cured!” That emphasises that the work capability assessments do not necessarily take cognisance of some of the very real issues. The Royal College of Psychiatrists states that “recessions have been shown to be accompanied by an increase in the suicide rates. The people most at risk of suicide at this time are those who are experiencing financial problems.” Evidence from the Centre for Welfare Reform showed that 45 per cent of people in debt have mental health problems, but that only 14 per cent of those who are not in debt have such problems. The centre’s hypothesis is that poor mental health is linked to real poverty, which I think has been borne out by some of the evidence. There is also an issue about the pressure that is experienced on the front line. When I was a member of the Finance Committee, I asked questions of Dr Margaret Somerville, from NHS Highland. She said: “I have not talked much about mental health issues, but we expect an early impact on mental health services and particularly on primary care services. Again, we need community resilience and support. Uncertainties and unknowns produce stress in people, which leads to depression and anxiety. That will have an impact on primary care and on our mental health services.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 12 June 2012; c 1388.] That shows clearly that welfare reform will have an impact on services. Stigma about mental illness still exists in many ways, which makes people more reluctant to come forward about their illness. Depending on the walk of life in which people operate and work, they might not come forward because they consider that to do so will impact on their job security. We must do all that we can to tackle stigma. I think that the mental health strategy will play a strong part in that, and I very much welcome it.

Neil Findlay has outlined a number of areas in which he would want to see increased funding, and he has put figures on some of those. Is he willing to identify where he would take the money away from to fund those increases?

Will the member give way?

I am sure that Willie Rennie would expect me, as a former member of Aberdeen City Council, to be taking a keen interest in this budget. I, too, have spoken to the cabinet secretary, and I think that the explanation that he gave around the three-year funding settlement is entirely satisfactory. The alternative would require the whole funding settlement to be reopened with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities. It is not only me who is satisfied. A recent front page of the Evening Express stated that there was a guarantee from the council administration that there would be no cuts in the coming financial year. That suggests not only that Aberdeen is receiving a good level of funding from the Scottish Government but that the previous council administration—on which I served, along with colleagues of Willie Rennie—left a good legacy due to its work on getting the council’s finances back in order. This is a budget that will deliver. It is a strong budget that delivers on the priorities that the Scottish Government has set out. The cabinet secretary has spoken about maintaining college places—we have made quite clear that we would maintain them at 2011-12 levels. We also have an emphasis on capital investment, and there is support for jobs and economic growth. However, members need not take my word for it; here are some of the remarks that were made after the cabinet secretary’s announcement. Robin Parker, of the National Union of Students, stated that the budget will deliver the “best student support package in the UK”, including the minimum income guarantee of £7,250, the protection of the education maintenance allowance, the protection of further education bursaries at the higher level—which NUS Scotland had been campaigning for—and no tuition fees. Andy Willox, of the Federation of Small Businesses, stated: “Having highlighted the need to support the private sector to create new jobs on the scale now required, we welcome the £15m youth employment initiative”. He also said that “new capital spending is good.” Liz Cameron, the chief executive of Scottish Chambers of Commerce, said: “Scottish businesses welcome John Swinney’s stated objective of prioritising economic growth” and “the continued focus that the Government places on the maximisation of capital spending and infrastructure investment.” Even the Confederation of British Industry Scotland hid away in its press release a number of positive announcements on construction, tourism, skills and incentives for firms to recruit young people. Finally, Michael Levack, the chief executive of the Scottish Building Federation, said: “The additional boost the Cabinet Secretary has given to the capital budget today is hugely welcome.” He also said that the UK Government must do more to rectify the current problem of the cut in capital investment “and demonstrate its own commitment to stimulating economic recovery.” I point out that that statement was made before the cabinet secretary outlined in December the additional capital investment that will be made as a result of the consequentials. To say that there is no support for the work that the Scottish Government is doing flies in the face of the testimony of those individuals and organisations. However, we cannot ignore the elephant in the room. Willie Rennie spoke about the impact of the UK budget on low-income families. I invite him to look at his own Government’s budget figures, which show quite clearly that the budget policies that his party is supporting in government in Westminster are to the detriment of people on low incomes. When he does so, I hope that he will come back to the chamber and admit that the UK Government’s budget measures will negatively impact on the lowest paid in our society and on low-income households. We must also factor in welfare reform. One of the great misconceptions around welfare reform is that it does not impact on those in work. However, we have already heard a lot of evidence—in the Welfare Reform Committee and in wider society—that many people in low-income jobs rely on benefits as well as the income that they receive. There will be negative impacts on them as a result of UK Government policies. Although the Scottish Government can use its powers to mitigate those negative impacts to some extent, we simply cannot wipe them all out. Welfare reform will be detrimental, and Mr Rennie must surely accept that.

The first principle of any welfare system should be that it is based on fairness. I see no fairness whatsoever in the approach that is being taken, because it is driven not by a fairness agenda but by a cost-cutting agenda. I do not think that that should be the primary focus. Indeed, if the UK Government were to spend half as much time pursuing tax loopholes and tax avoidance as it spends pursuing the most vulnerable and lowest paid in society, it might find little need for some of its draconian measures. Instead, it is all too quick to approach those in our society who do not have big pockets and make them the scapegoats for its failed economic approach. What says the Labour Party in this Parliament? I understand that being in opposition can be an easy gig; all Opposition members have to do is stand up and promise everyone the moon on a stick to make themselves popular. However, it is not enough for the Labour Party simply to turn round and say that more money should be spent on housing, further education, transport and local government through unidentified efficiency savings and underspends—oh, and the Ryder cup trip, or what Glasgow Labour calls a pay-off. That is its suggestion for resolving all the difficulties faced by the Scottish Government. Frankly, that is nothing more than the politics of dishonesty. Unless it has some proper proposals to bring to the table, no one is going to take Labour seriously.

The internet is a fantastic resource that has opened up opportunities for communication and knowledge sharing that most people would never have dreamed were possible. For example, those of us who have relations in other countries find it much easier to communicate with them and share what is going on in our lives. Indeed, my father works in Africa quite often and I have family in Canada, but I have been able to keep them all up to date, via social networking, with my children’s progress. It has been fantastic for that. We should also accept, though, that the internet is a place of great dangers. The anonymity that it offers to users makes it a place in which bullies can operate with much greater impunity that in a physical environment. That is why a resource such as Kibooku is so fantastic and extremely welcome, given the figures on aggressive and unpleasant behaviours online and parents’ worries about that. My children are too young to use social media, but one day they will probably wish to do so and explore the internet. My son has developed something of an expertise with the touch-screen computer at his nursery, so it will probably not be too long before he tries to use computers to access the internet and all the opportunities that it will offer him. However, there are concerns about the dangers out there, which is why we require safe social networking and internet environments for our children. We must accept that young children will want to use online resources. We can put in place firewall protection and parental controls, but there are only so many restrictions that parents can put in place. That is why I think that the parent-child element of Kibooku sets it apart from other social networking sites. The fact that the parent must be involved in the registration process differentiates it from other social media, which is extremely welcome. It provides the assurance to parents that their children are accessing something that is more secure and safe for them, and it allows the children to know that it is safe to use. Hopefully, they will be more willing to consider it than other social networking sites. I look forward to the opportunity that will be presented tomorrow and I hope to find the time to be able to come and have a look at Kibooku in action. However, we should not allow other social networking forums and sites off the hook. It would be stretching it to assume that Mr Zuckerberg is sitting in Facebook headquarters right now watching a live stream of this debate, but he and his company and other social networking sites, be it Bebo, Microsoft Messenger or BlackBerry Messenger, must up their game and start taking more responsibility for the fact that they allow young children to access their sites without the proper verifications. I have seen profiles of friends’ children and of family members who are clearly too young to have their own profile according to the sites’ rules but nonetheless have one. Not enough is being done by companies to ensure that they are protecting young people from some of the difficulties and dangers that lie in accessing social media sites at a young age. As well as welcoming the introduction of Kibooku and congratulating Mr Tosh on his fine efforts, this chamber should also be sending a message to the other social networking organisations that they have much to do to ensure the safety of not only Scotland’s children but children around the world. I hope that, somehow, that message reaches them at some point.

I am sure that the member will also be aware of the existence of groups on sites such as Facebook and Bebo that are devoted entirely to criticising and bullying individuals, which happens frequently.

Like my colleague Stewart Stevenson, I have a family interest in the planning system; my uncle is a joiner. I welcome the debate and come at it from having been a local councillor in Aberdeen. I know that the minister is always keen to look at the example of Aberdeen City Council and its strong planning performance, but it was not always so. When I first arrived at the council in 2007, it was still operating a local plan that dated from 1991 because of a legacy of inertia and incompetence that had been left by previous administrations. The process of putting in a new local plan had been started by the previous administration in 2004 and was eventually seen through. However, that led to a system of planning by appeal, in which any application that was rejected by the council was immediately appealed and, because of the lack of an updated local plan, the decision was more often in the hands of the Scottish Executive than in the hands of the local council and the planning committee. That led to friction and bad publicity for the planning process. I am thankful that a new local plan is now in place and that it was very well marshalled through by the previous administration. I hope that the current administration will continue with it. During my time at Aberdeen City Council, I was very enthusiastic about and supportive of the charrette approach. Indeed, one of the three charrettes that was proposed during the 2006 to 2010 period was sited in my council ward of Dyce, Bucksburn and Danestone, at the Grandhome estate. It was an extremely large charrette that looked at developing not just a small planning area but a wider community that would consist of several neighbourhoods. It was designed to form a comprehensive network. Its point was about place-making, which was one of the themes that the minister discussed. That event brought together community members, interested groups, councillors and a wide range of council departments to look at the front end of the process. It meant that a large amount of time had to be put in at the very outset, but the idea behind that initial input was to streamline the process of planning applications. Based on the Grandhome estate experience, the charrette approach certainly bears examination with regard to future developments in Scotland. The approach also provided an opportunity to examine how one might develop an area and a community—indeed, a sustainable community—instead of simply taking the old approach of throwing up a few houses without providing associated amenities or any business infrastructure. The idea was to develop a community in which people could walk to and from school, their place of work or various facilities and, where that was not possible, to integrate in the community a bus network in order to provide sustainable transport. However, the process also made it clear that attitudes have to change. I remember how, during the local plan process, a councillor from the neighbouring ward attempted to move to other sites in the city all the housing that had been set aside for Grandhome as a result of the charrette. That councillor’s view was that the move would lead to an overburdening of housing in the area, but they did not bear in mind that the charrette was attempting to achieve the creation of a more sustainable community. With regard to transparency and accountability, I note that, in its submission, Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce makes the interesting point that producing a written statement of reasons in cases where committees go against the planners’ expressed recommendation might lead to greater transparency in the decision-making process. Indeed, that might help developers and communities to understand why an application was approved or rejected against such a recommendation. As for training needs, I note that the Royal Town Planning Institute has welcomed the extra funding for Heads of Planning Scotland, but has also suggested the creation of a knowledge portal to involve all players in the planning process. As well as training planning officials, we also need to train elected members in their planning responsibilities. One of my early experiences on becoming elected as a councillor was my being contacted by another councillor who wanted to discuss an upcoming planning application. As all of us should know, councillors are forbidden from discussing or declaring their position on planning applications in advance of the application being scrutinised, but anecdotal evidence certainly suggests that some councillors tell constituents how they intend to vote on a planning application before it comes before committee. That puts at risk not just the elected member, but the planning application and the integrity of the planning system itself. We must therefore ensure that councillors are included in any training. Finally, I welcome the changes with regard to fees. After all, the disparity between the fees that are levied south of the border and in other parts of these islands, and those that are levied here has been an issue for some time, particularly in relation to major applications that are submitted by significant interests that have the money to pay higher fees. I welcome the minister’s comments in that respect and look forward to seeing the detailed proposals. The debate is relevant, and I hope that the comments that are being made will shape the proposals that the Government introduces.

I appreciate the point about planning gain, but does John Finnie also accept that, where a developer seeks to build large amounts of housing in an area, there ought to be some mechanism by which the developer can contribute to the required infrastructure—education and so on—that will be needed to cope with the additional housing?

I know that Mr Harvie and I have different opinions on economic growth, but what would be his message to the many constituents whom I represent whose livelihoods and family incomes are entirely dependent on the offshore industry in the oil and gas sector?

I am aware that time is tight and the length of speeches for final speakers has been reduced, so it is not my intention to take interventions. I should first declare my interests in the subject. My brother is employed in offshore health and safety, and my father owns and operates a business in the supply chain in the north-east. I start with the supply chain and indirect employment. We often focus on those who work offshore or who are directly employed by oil companies, but there is a vast network of companies, businesses and jobs in the north-east that are dependent on the industry. It is not as simple as looking only at the companies that directly supply the industry; members need to consider, for example, the shops, hotels and other facilities within the area that depend on the industry for their income and their survival. My colleague Kevin Stewart made the point that the transition needs to take time in order for it to bed in. I say to Patrick Harvie that that is a valid point because so much of the infrastructure is dependent on the sector and it is not just a simple case of making the transition quickly. Having said that, I agree that the skills are transferable between the oil and gas and renewables sectors. Indeed, from the discussions that I have had with oil and gas sector representatives, it is clear that they are aware of the transferable opportunities and what those could realise for their businesses. They recognise that they operate within a sector that will not be around for ever due to the finite nature of the resource, but they also recognise that their businesses, companies and expertise can be around for ever if they diversify and take advantage of the transferable opportunities. We have an extremely good and strong safety regime in the North Sea. Unfortunately, it has too often been shaped by tragedy. It has often been the case that the reaction to tragedies, such as those related to Piper Alpha or helicopter ditching, has resulted in good work being done by the industry and the unions to ensure that the health and safety of those working in the sector is paramount. On the economic argument of the value of oil and gas, I noted the comments made by Kenny Paton, oil and gas partner at Bond Pearce, in the Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce report: “With a grim economic picture elsewhere in the UK Aberdeen is bucking the national trend. It is a beacon of activity attracting all sorts of professions seeking exposure to this market from accountants to IT and, of course, legal as well as those more readily associated with the industry.” The fact that Aberdeen was the only part of the UK that grew during the recession demonstrates how important the sector is not only to the north-east but to the wider national economy. I was interested in Mary Scanlon’s comparison of the value of oil and gas revenues and her statement that they account for only 0.7 per cent of UK gross domestic product. In that case, the UK will not miss them after 2014. Skills shortages exist in the oil and gas industry, and the Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce is doing work to address them. The skills survey identified that 68 per cent of contractors and 75 per cent of operators reported experiencing problems in recruiting suitable employees in particular occupations. In my discussions I have noticed that there is a significant recruitment gap. A number of people are due to retire and, although there are significant numbers of new entrants into the workforce, there is a gap in the middle that needs to be filled. The difficulties faced relate to the existing immigration rules and controls that the UK Government is putting in place and which make it difficult to import skilled workers from elsewhere to come and work in the north-east and rest of Scotland. It is vital that those difficulties are addressed appropriately. When I attended the recent your future in energy event in the north-east, at which young people from schools were given the opportunity to learn more about the oil and gas sector, I found it interesting how few of them understood the sector, even when they had parents and family members who worked in it. That spoke of an industry in which people do not share their experiences to a large enough extent. That takes us back to the skills shortage argument. In the past, many have been put off a career in oil and gas as a result of unfortunate scare stories and tales of woe about the industry and its future viability. We finally have a consensus on the future viability of the oil and gas industry such that young people know that they can enter the industry when they leave school and have a full career in it if they wish to do so. If those truths had been told back in the 70s and 80s, we might not have been facing the skills shortages that we face now and our nation might have seen much more economic benefit as a result.

Will the member give way?

I welcome the debate. I was a member of the Finance Committee for a large part of the inquiry, although that was some months ago. The committee’s inquiry and the debate are timely and I congratulate past and present committee members who have put the work into the report that we are discussing today. I also extend the greetings of the season and wish everyone a very happy 2013. One of the things that comes across from the report and the discussions that the committee had when I was a member is that the key to the approach is partnership. No one sector has a monopoly of wisdom on, or responsibility for, delivering better outcomes and improving employability within Scotland, or for improving opportunities for young people who find it difficult to get into employment. All sectors and all organisations need to look at what they are doing—and at what they can do—to deliver better outcomes. I will focus on that theme during my speech. Last year, I had the great pleasure of attending the inaugural discover opportunities awards at the West Park Centre in Dundee, which celebrated the work that the Dundee Partnership does to help to get people into sustainable employment. At the ceremony, a number of people were given awards for the work that they have done, both as employers and as employees, as a result of the schemes that have been set up in the area. The Dundee Partnership has done good work and should be looked at as a model that could be replicated elsewhere. We can also look at models in other areas. I note that the written submission from Scotland’s Colleges mentions Dundee College’s pupil access to college and employability—PACE—programme and the successes there. The programme offers “a full-time programme for pupils in their last 6 months of school and a part-time programme for pupils in their last 12 months.” It often re-engages “young people who have a range of complex needs and who have disengaged from mainstream educational provision.” It provides “48 full-time places and 32 part-time places” and is open to “young people who are affected by family circumstances; health or disability; social, emotional and behavioural difficulties or the learning environment.” There is a crucial element to that—which I will come back to—in that it looks beyond the skills sets that we provide people with, to the lives and lifestyles that people lead. We need to consider that when we are looking at employability and at improving pathways to employment. In that regard, I also highlight the example of Aberdeen Foyer, with which, I know, both the cabinet secretary and the minister are familiar and which does a fantastic amount of good work. My colleague Dennis Robertson’s comments about the buoyant economy of the north-east of Scotland are certainly true in the Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire context, but within that buoyant economy there are still pockets of deprivation, problems and individuals who find it difficult to access employment. That is why the work that Aberdeen Foyer does is so important. Its learning houses, which are based in Peterhead and Fraserburgh in Mr Stevenson’s constituency, offer training and support to people who might otherwise not be able to access such resources. It also has in place a Prince’s Trust team that provides a programme of individual challenges and teamwork in the community, thereby giving young people aged 16 to 25 an opportunity that enables them to develop their confidence, motivation and skills. Aberdeen Foyer also has a get ready for work programme, which is designed to assist young people who may need additional support to make the transition beyond school into the world of work. The programme lasts for up to 26 weeks, although individuals do not have to stay for the entire 26 weeks, and some will not require to stay for that time. All those programmes demonstrate that good work is being done out there; we should be looking at that good work to see whether it can be replicated elsewhere. We should also consider the role that community partnerships can play. In that regard, I commend the Aberdeenshire employability strategy, which has been produced by a range of organisations, including Aberdeenshire Council, Aberdeen Foyer and others. It includes a number of outcomes that the organisations want to achieve. I was interested to see that one of the outcomes is a reduction in homelessness, which they see as being crucial to dealing with employability. That brings me back to the point that the issue is not just about skills sets; it is also about lifestyles. Who Cares? Scotland made that point in relation to care leavers. If someone’s background and lifestyle behind the world of work are chaotic or problematic and there issues within it, that will affect not just their ability to access employment or to be suitable for employment, but their ability to sustain employment. We need to bear that in mind as part of the debate. As members have mentioned, it is important not just to get people to the stage at which they can turn up for interview and succeed in getting a job, but to ensure that they have the ability and confidence to sustain that employment. That is why I believe that, if we were to look at the issue as being only about development of skills, we would miss the point. A much wider societal approach needs to be taken to ensure that people have balanced lifestyles, which will help them to sustain employment once they find it.

On 3 December, Jackie Baillie said that the suspension of two NHS Tayside employees was “the beginning of a national scandal of health boards fiddling waiting times”, and claimed that SNP members owed her an apology. As the two staff members have been fully investigated and, this week, reinstated—

Today’s reports demonstrate Ms Baillie’s claims to be false. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the only apology owed is one by Jackie Baillie to the hard-working staff of our NHS?

I speak as another former member of the Finance Committee. Indeed, I think that I am right in saying that, of the original members of the committee at the start of this session of Parliament, only the convener and the deputy convener remain. I assure them that it is nothing personal. We face tough financial times. We have already heard from the convener of the committee about the 11 per cent fall in revenue and the 26 per cent fall in capital that the Scottish Parliament and Government will receive as a result of the austerity measures that are being pursued at Westminster. That makes it all the more interesting that we are somehow supposed to dance with joy when crumbs occasionally fall from the Westminster table. It is undoubtedly welcome that additional capital investment is coming to Scotland, but that does not disguise the fact that the UK Government remains committed to a wrong-headed austerity approach. We do not have to take the word of the Scottish Government for that; Nobel laureates such as Krugman and Stiglitz are out there saying that the focus should clearly be on economic growth. However, the chancellor has decided not to grow his way out of a recession but to cut his way out, which has been clearly demonstrated to be the wrong approach—not only for the economy but for the most vulnerable people in society. The budget is about priorities. A Government, a Parliament and a nation that are operating within a shrinking resource and in tough financial times must make decisions about their priorities. This Government has made it clear where its priorities lie. It seeks, for example, to protect front-line health spending. That protection was unanimously backed in the Health and Sport Committee report—signed off by all members of the committee—which said that the best way to do that in these difficult times is to target the Barnett consequentials at territorial health boards. There has been investment to maintain and uplift the living wage, and there has been an announcement that the pay freeze for public sector workers will end next year. It represents just a modest increase, but it is an increase, nonetheless. The Scottish Government has also continued to invest in the universal benefits that benefit not only the most vulnerable people, but wider society. It was interesting that Kenneth Macintosh went with his “A Christmas Carol” theme because—as we all know—if it were up to the Labour Party, Tiny Tim would be paying for his prescriptions. Use and deployment of capital expenditure to deliver economic growth is important. It is a key element of what the Scottish Government is trying to do, not just in terms of the capital investment that is coming forward as a result of the crumbs that are falling from the Westminster table, but in terms of the shift of resource to capital in order to try to boost employment and grow the economy within the limited powers that are available to us. Another priority for this Government is the preventative spend agenda, which represents the shifting of significant sums of money in order to ensure that, instead of trying to deal with problems at the end of the process and tackling problems that arise, we get down to the root causes of the problems. Those causes are the societal issues that need to be dealt with by developing things such as family nurse partnerships, which ensure that people in the most hard-to-reach areas get the support that they require to prevent problems that might otherwise arise later in their lives. That requires a significant shift in funding, which this Government is providing and, crucially, it requires a significant change in the mindset of the public sector. As parliamentarians, we must all do whatever we can to ensure that that change occurs, which is where I have a difficulty with the doom-mongering approach that Mr Macintosh so often brings to the chamber. We always hear from the Labour Party that it wants more money to be spent on this or that, but the politics of tough times require honesty from those who argue for additional spending.

No. Mr Kelly is not going to stand up and invent more spin doctors who do not exist and claim that, somehow—

No.

No means no, thank you. I was speaking in plain English, Mr Kelly. It does not behove the Opposition to call for more spending here and there without the consequential admission of where funding would have to be removed from to pay for that. I know that it is a difficult balancing act for Mr Macintosh to carry out—

I have said “No” once and I will say it again.

It is a difficult balancing act for Mr Macintosh to carry out because all Labour’s spokespeople say that they want more funding for the areas for which they are responsible. However, he should at least have the humility and decency when he argues for funding increases also to argue for where he would take the money from to pay for those increases. I make no apologies and the SNP makes no apologies for making it clear—

I am in my final minute. The SNP makes no apologies for making it clear that it would be much easier for us to shape and control the future and destiny of Scotland had we the powers to shape our taxation system; to shape our welfare system to ensure that there is a safety net for the most vulnerable people; and to deploy borrowing powers to the betterment of our economy instead of sitting around, hoping for some sort of charitable hand-out from a distant and uninterested Westminster Government.

The announcement in the run-up to Christmas that the Dundee factory is to close was a massive kick in the gut to the factory’s dedicated workforce. Nevertheless, the workforce is keen to try to keep the factory open and to explore all the available options. What support can the Scottish Government offer to ensure that workers can explore possibilities such as a social enterprise model or other options that could help them in their efforts to keep the factory open and ensure that their dedicated work does not end when the factory’s support is withdrawn?

I congratulate my colleague Christina McKelvie on securing the debate and send her my best wishes as she recovers. I also pay tribute to Sandra White, who did a fantastic job in standing in for Christina at such short notice. I believe that, fundamentally, Scotland is and always has been an open, inclusive and welcoming nation. Migrants from across the world have enriched our land throughout our history. We can see that in our education system—last week we had a debate on Camphill Scotland, which was founded by Austrian migrants—as well as in our language, architecture, food, song, literature, wider cultural output, sport and even our politics, as my colleague Linda Fabiani has pointed out to me. She is of immigrant stock, and I am sure that everyone would agree that she has greatly enriched the politics of Scotland in her time. The important point to mention is that “immigration” is not a dirty word. Far too often, politicians and commentators use the terms “migrant” and “immigrant” in a pejorative way, looking to cast a negative association with them. That is extremely dangerous rhetoric. Helen Eadie was right to talk about times of economic difficulty. When we enter such times, there is often a tendency to look for a scapegoat—for a section of society that can be marginalised and blamed for the difficulties that ordinary indigenous workers are facing. Often, it is migrant communities that are targeted as the people who are taking jobs away from the indigenous workforce. We must be vigilant against that tendency and we must reject those sentiments, whether they are explicit or implicit. Some politicians will make such statements in a more explicit fashion than others, but the sentiment still exists, however it is put across. We should also remember that migration is very much the key to Scotland’s future. We talk a lot about the demographic challenges that Scotland will face in the future when the number of people who require to be supported by the working-age population will put a strain on the taxation base of our nation. That is a simple fact. We have to find a way to increase the working-age population of Scotland, and the only way we can do that is to attract skilled migrant workers who will come to Scotland and make it their home. The difficulty that we face in trying to do that is that we are living in a situation in which the Westminster Government is taking decisions on immigration that seek to solve a problem that does not exist in Scotland. We need immigration and we need to encourage it. I believe that immigration is fundamentally a good thing in and of itself, even if we take the economics out of the issue. When people come to Scotland from elsewhere in the world, it enriches our land—irrespective of the economic arguments—simply by increasing the diversity of our communities and by helping us to develop new experiences as a people. I passionately believe that the only way we can continue the cultural enrichment that comes from migration, and which is celebrated through events such as migrants’ rights day, is through Scotland’s having control of its own immigration system. People can say that that is a political point; it is, but I believe that it is the key to the issue, whether on the economic side or the cultural enrichment side. I believe that the UK Government is taking the wrong approach, which is based on the negative perceptions of immigration that I outlined. It would be far better if we had the powers here in Scotland to do things that are in Scotland’s interests when it comes to immigration. I look forward to the day when Scotland has its own immigration policies.

I thank members of parties from all around the chamber who signed my motion, which has enabled it to be debated in the chamber. I also thank the National Autistic Society Scotland, first for inviting me to the launch event for the autism alert card, and secondly for the support that it provided to me in drafting the motion and preparing for the debate. I note that, as my debate follows Alison McInnes’s debate on Camphill yesterday and precedes Richard Baker’s debate tomorrow lunchtime, we have a hat-trick of North East Scotland members’ debates in Parliament this week. I hope that the high standard that Alison McInnes’s debate set last night will continue during this debate and tomorrow’s debate, as I have every confidence they will. I am holding up the autism alert card that the Grampian region launched on 12 November, one month ago today. I believe that it will make a key contribution to improving understanding of autism in the criminal justice system, and that it will have a wider application across the public and private sectors. The card demonstrates a strong commitment from the organisations that have signed up to it, which include Grampian Police, NHS Grampian, the three north-east councils, Autism Initiatives Scotland, G4S, Grampian Autistic Society and The National Autistic Society. The input of G4S, which handles prisoner transfer, is an important facet, alongside Grampian Police’s involvement. When I was offered the opportunity to speak at the launch event on 12 November, I said that I hoped that other organisations in the public and private sectors would look at ways in which they could buy into the process and make use of the autism alert card in order to help them and individuals with autism and Asperger’s syndrome who may use their services or frequent their premises. The card has been launched to help to ensure that those with the condition are quickly identified and supported by Grampian Police and a range of partner organisations that I have just outlined. The National Autistic Society Scotland is heralding the card as a “breakthrough” for Grampian. There are an estimated 50,000 Scots with autism, nearly 6,000 of whom are thought to live in the Grampian region. The card will include details of a personal contact who can lead police and other organisations through the best ways to help the individual with autism in what could be highly pressured experiences for them. At the launch event we heard from David Silvester, a retired joiner from Moray who has Asperger’s syndrome. He said: “On the outside I appear articulate and look like I’m functioning well. This could be a real problem if I’m a victim of crime or accident, because police will expect me to communicate and process information in the same way they do, and I can’t always do this.” He went on to say: “It would be great if the public could see that people with autism are not ‘weird’ or ‘odd’. We just see the world in a different way. We have support needs, but also capabilities. For example, I’m very observant, and often spot the detail in a situation or conversation that many people might miss, so I could be an excellent witness. But the police would need to know the best way to communicate with me. That’s where the Autism Alert card could be invaluable.” Sandy Fraser, who is 18 and from New Deer, and who has Asperger’s syndrome, also attended that event. In the press release that was issued following the event, he was quoted as saying: “I’m an observant driver, but if I come into contact with the police the flashing lights, crackling radio noises, high visibility vests and the questioning could be confusing and overwhelming. I think the Autism Alert card is going to really help police resolve these kinds of situations with less stress.” Karen Williams, who is the director of corporate services at Grampian Police, said that the card “will allow our officers to quickly identify a card-holder’s condition, improve understanding of their needs and offer them the best possible support.” The crucial issue is that understanding of autism be improved. Only a minority of people with autism come into contact with the criminal justice system as victims, witnesses, suspects or offenders, but they are vulnerable because of their social and communication difficulties. Making an emergency 999 call—many of us would take that process for granted—can be very difficult for someone with autism, as can giving a statement to a police officer following a burglary. The wider implications of the situation may not be apparent to them, and they can have difficulty in understanding the subtleties of language. For example, they often interpret statements literally, so if anyone uses figures of speech, colloquialisms, sarcasm or humour, that is often not relayed by the individual, which can often lead to their displaying what could be considered to be suspicious or difficult and challenging behaviour. The card contains enough basic information to allow a police officer or other member of the emergency services to recognise someone with autism and support them through a range of situations. Police forces are also supported to identify training for their staff to improve their knowledge of autism. Some areas have produced short films to demonstrate the alert card in use in a variety of situations, such as at airport security, with a witness to a crime, or at a home fire-safety check. It should be noted that the Grampian autism alert card stands alongside cards that have been issued in Strathclyde, Lothian and Borders, and Highlands and Islands. Although there has been no formal evaluation of the schemes yet, the National Autistic Society Scotland has said that there is informal evidence from people that the cards are helping. Users of the card have reported that knowing that they feel safer and more confident in public spaces improves their self-confidence. They also feel more confident when they come into contact with organisations. Police officers and others have said that they are helped to support people with autism better. That has led to the avoidance of more serious situations developing and has potentially avoided more costly interventions, which are often not needed. We should note that the recent case of Gary McKinnon, for example, has much to teach us about societal and criminal justice attitudes towards autism and Asperger’s syndrome. Much still needs to be done to educate not just the public sector, but wider society and politicians about the difficulties that can be caused when people with autism or Asperger’s syndrome come into contact with the criminal justice system or other services. As we move to having a national police force, the Government and the national police force might consider whether the scheme could be replicated on a national basis. I know that the National Autistic Society is keen on that, and I am certainly keen on it. The anecdotal evidence that has been received certainly suggests that it is of benefit. I hope that the Government will consider progressing that.

Is the member aware that the National Autistic Society frequently tweets autism myths and facts? I take the trouble to retweet those tweets. The charity does good work to try to dispel myths and explain facts about autism.

I congratulate Alison McInnes on bringing the debate to the chamber. I also thank Laurence Alfred of Camphill in Aberdeen for taking the time to show me around the campus on Deeside yesterday afternoon, and the many residents, pupils and co-workers from Camphill communities across Scotland who came to Parliament today. I had the pleasure of sampling what was probably the smelliest but certainly the tastiest cheese from the award-winning cheese range at Loch Arthur, as well as some of the jams that were on display. I have taken away an order form to ensure that I get my Christmas cheese board sorted. What I saw when I visited Camphill yesterday was what I would consider to be the embodiment of whole-life learning and the notion that learning does not just exist in the classroom or the school but is part of life. That was very clear from the discussions that I had with Laurence as I was going around the site. Indeed, I was drawn to the Education Scotland report that Lewis Macdonald cited that was issued in January this year. It talks about the particular strengths of the school: “Happy, relaxed children and young people who feel safe, valued and respected. The dedication and enthusiasm of staff and their sensitivity to individual needs. Use of the natural environment to develop children and young people’s communication, personal, social and vocational skills.” We heard about the fantastic eco award that the Camphill school in Aberdeen received. The report goes on to mention: “The breadth of the curriculum including therapeutic support services. The effective implementation of a clear and shared vision for care and education of the coordinators.” That speaks volumes for the school’s ethos. During my visit, the community feel of the school campus was very clear. The community ethos is also demonstrated by some of the fundraising efforts that are taking place. Indeed, I note from documentation that has been provided to me that the school is trying to develop the swimming pool and intends to raise £70,000 to spend on new equipment for the swimming pool. The school does not just raise funds for local issues. The spring and summer school newsletter states that “Camphill school Aberdeen has raised £1029.00 for Tools for Self Reliance” in Africa. That speaks volumes for the hard work ethos of the school. One issue that was raised with me during my visit was the fact that the local authority has categorised Camphill as an out-of-authority school. Geographically, it is in the city of Aberdeen, but children who go there are categorised in the same way as if they were being sent on a placement to Cornwall or Bristol. The issue has been raised with the chief executive of Aberdeen City Council. Part of the getting it right for every child agenda should be that we look at the kind of environment that is provided at Camphill. Another crucial issue is what happens to the funding for children when they reach 16. It is possible that such children might no longer be afforded the opportunity to remain in the Camphill environment, despite the fact that, on balance, it is probably the best thing for them. Local authorities need to consider that carefully when they take decisions regarding those young people. People of my generation, and possibly people more widely in the north-east community, will probably be aware of Camphill in the context of the controversies that existed around the Aberdeen western peripheral route. It would be a great pity if that were the only thing for which Camphill was known. From my visit and from members’ speeches, it is clear that there is a whole lot more to it and that people really should take the time to find that out.

We talk a lot about choices during debates in this chamber. Recently, we have heard talk from Labour members—indeed, from the Labour leader—about the need to make tough choices, but when push comes to shove, all too often the Labour Party is found wanting. Labour members come to this chamber and criticise the choices that the Government makes, but they never offer any alternative choices that we could make instead. They never tell us how they would redirect funding to areas in the health service, or where funding would come from to pay for their priorities.

I will happily hear Sarah Boyack’s point in the winding-up speeches—I have only four minutes. We need to know exactly what the Labour Party’s priorities are. I believe that generally there is a consensus about the approach to funding front-line health services through the targeting of the increases to the territorial health boards.

I ask Ms Baillie to leave it to the winding-up speeches; as I said, I have only four minutes.

We need to hear the Labour Party’s priorities. The Government has set out its priorities as part of the budget process, and if the Labour Party disagrees with them, it is perfectly able to suggest alternatives. However, we never hear alternatives—all we hear are complaints. The issue of universality, as raised by my colleague Aileen McLeod, is important, whether it is in relation to free prescriptions, free dental checks or free eye checks. Indeed, Optometry Scotland recently produced a briefing on free eye checks. I was glad to be invited to a dinner to discuss that matter further; Jackie Baillie and Duncan McNeil also attended. Optometry Scotland spoke about the savings that accrue as result of free eye checks. It spoke about £60 million of direct savings and £440 million of indirect savings from free eye checks. Those universal services—perhaps they were what Jackson Carlaw alluded to when he spoke about “chickens that would come home to roost”—are extremely important and a key part of the preventative spend agenda.—[Interruption.]

The Government is making efforts to more closely link health and social care. I welcome that because it will be of great benefit, particularly as we try to shift to healthcare and social care models in which people will be treated more in their own homes, rather than being admitted to hospital. The one thing that gives me a little bit of concern, which I hope to discuss further with the cabinet secretary, is Aberdeen City Council’s recent move to make its social care department an arm’s-length trading company. NHS Grampian is concerned that that may create some difficulties regarding the health and social care agenda. I will happily speak to the cabinet secretary about that. Finally, I will focus on NHS dentistry. When this Government came to power, thousands of people in Grampian were on waiting lists for NHS dentistry. Now, as noted in a parliamentary answer or perhaps in a letter to one of my colleagues, the Minister for Public Health has made it clear that by March 2013 virtually nobody will be on a waiting list in the NHS Grampian area. That is a strong testimony to this Government’s efforts to invest in NHS dentistry and dental clinics. Did we hear anything from the Labour Party to welcome that? We heard not a peep. As we know, the Labour Party is only happy when it is unhappy.

I heard the UK minister say, during a debate at Westminster the other week, that Scotland gets a good deal because we are, on occasion, allowed into the room during negotiations. Given that the talks are to be led by Cyprus, which has a population of 1.1 million, does the cabinet secretary share my belief that it is time not just that Scotland was in the room negotiating, but that we had the opportunity to lead the negotiations in the future?

Will the member give way?

It is worth taking a moment to reflect on where this situation arose. Willie Rennie referred to Kate and Gerry McCann as examples in that regard. There is also the example of Chris Jefferies, the landlord of the murder victim Jo Yeates in Bristol.

The people to whom I referred were ordinary people who did not seek the limelight, but they were thrust into it. In the case of the McCanns, it was as a result of an unthinkable tragedy. Those of us who are parents could not begin to imagine the nightmare that they went through. The case of Mr Jefferies involves a man who had his reputation, innocence and dignity questioned and undermined by sections of the press. We could also go back further to look at the many ordinary individuals who were wrongly outed as paedophiles during tabloid campaigns and whose reputations, innocence and dignity were questioned. It is not just about celebrities, although there are serious to questions to be asked about the treatment of those individuals and their families. Indeed, Charlotte Church spoke openly and honestly about the deeply personal impact on her family that occurred as a result of the coverage that affected her. When considering the Leveson inquiry conclusions, the Irish example is instructive and merits scrutiny. I am not suggesting for one second that it would be an all-singing, all-dancing panacea, but Lord Leveson clearly looked at it and we have an opportunity to consider it further. It is worth looking at the genesis of the Irish model. In 2003, the then minister Michael McDowell established a legal advisory group to look at the defamation laws in Ireland and their possible reform, with a view to the establishment of a statutory press council. At the same time, there was talk of reform of the privacy laws in Ireland and a need perhaps to strengthen and tighten them, to prevent elements of press intrusion. That led the press owners and the National Union of Journalists to design an alternative regulatory system themselves, as they wanted to stave off the implementation of much harsher privacy laws. They persuaded the Government to accept an interim press council and press ombudsman system that would be funded by the press and which in its operation would be independent of the press.

In The Irish Times on Saturday 1 December, the columnist Noel Whelan said that although the Leveson model “includes basic tenets of the Irish Model,” he believes that the Leveson recommendations propose “a stronger system” than that which exists in Ireland. It is a case not simply of looking at the Irish model in and of itself, but of looking at whether changes could be made. Talking about the Irish model in today’s Irish Times, Conor Brady, the former editor of that newspaper, said: “In 2011 the ombudsman processed 343 complaints, the vast majority against national newspapers. A great swathe of what might have translated into slow and costly litigation” was avoided as a result of the effective operation of the ombudsman in Ireland.

The First Minister has been clear that he wants the statutory underpinning to involve the adherence to Scots law by any regulatory body. In today’s debate, he has not said that the regulatory body should be a distinctly Scottish body. We are relaxed about the proposals that may come forward. Johann Lamont must accept that, although her party has given an indication about introducing legislation, it is not in a position to do that at Westminster—although we do not know what the Liberal Democrats’ position would be on that. At the moment, the position of the UK Government and the Prime Minister indicates that legislation will not be forthcoming.

We must go forward on a cross-party basis. Despite what Ruth Davidson alleges, it is clear that the First Minister has never said that there must be a Scottish regulator. He has made it quite clear that the setting up of the body is a matter for the press: he said that to Brian Taylor on Thursday 29 November, he said it at First Minister’s question time when talking about a “strengthened voluntary press council”, he said it in an article in The Sunday Herald on 2 December, and he said in an interview on STV that it would be for “the press to come forward with a self-regulatory body.” Those of us who have had reason to complain to the Press Complaints Commission know the clear disproportionality between the initial coverage and the contrition, apology or retraction afterwards. That needs to be looked at fundamentally, because reputations are often made or broken by the initial coverage. Often, a small retraction or apology in a sub-heading or column is simply not enough for those individuals who feel the pain afterwards.

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that we have seen an evolution towards much more of a social enterprise model at the Aberdeen site, and that the Westminster Government seems oblivious to the very strong social enterprise sector that exists in Scotland?

Along with my colleagues Kevin Stewart and Maureen Watt, I wrote to Maria Miller, Esther McVey’s predecessor as the Minister for Disabled People, to ask her to visit the Aberdeen Remploy factory. I wrote to her on 23 April, 6 July and 17 July but, on each occasion, she refused to visit. That puts into context the lack of interest with which the UK Government has viewed the situation of Remploy not just in Aberdeen but in Scotland as a whole. The UK Government was ignorant of the social enterprise model that was being developed in Aberdeen—there was a clear lack of understanding of it. As my colleague Kevin Stewart pointed out, the UK Government also seemed entirely uninterested in the crippling rental burden that was being placed on Aberdeen Remploy, which absolutely affected the ability of that social enterprise hub to grow and flourish. What is almost a phoenix from the flames has risen in Aberdeen, because seven of the 14 former Remploy workers have set up Aberdeen Textiles and Workwear Services as a co-operative. The other seven workers chose to take redundancy packages following Aberdeen Remploy’s closure. It has been reported that old and new customers have approached the new firm about possible business. However, although Remploy and the UK Government said that assets would be transferred, the workers in Aberdeen have not been able to obtain the hard drives from the former Remploy factory, which has hampered their ability to seek work actively and co-operate with former customers. In a letter to me of 17 November, Esther McVey clarified that the factories would not be sold off en bloc—it had been feared that they would be available only for large private enterprises to purchase as a block. She also said: “Along with Remploy, we are keen for the factory’s assets including fixtures and machinery to be disposed of in the best way, particularly where they may be used to support disabled people locally.” Allowing the former Remploy workers in Aberdeen access to the computer drives from the old Remploy site would assist disabled people locally and would assist the new social enterprise in going forward. I encourage the UK Government to work with Remploy to make that happen and ensure that the new business continues to grow and flourish. I welcome the Scottish Government’s response and the statement from the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism that he has visited all the sites that are part of stage 2. I point again to the response that I received from Maria Miller—a contrast perhaps exists between the Scottish Government minister’s willingness to visit Remploy sites and see the work that goes on there and the UK Government’s desire to sit in its Whitehall ivory towers and issue edicts, without going out and seeing the work that is taking place at the front line. I am grateful that the minister has agreed to look at bringing forward a scheme similar to that in Wales. That will be of benefit in supporting workers who have been victims of the closures at stage 1. Much has been made of the role that the public sector can play. The situation at Glencraft was mentioned. Its salvation, if you will, came as a result of a combination of the Scottish Government, the council and PSN coming into the situation. PSN helped in providing much-needed sales and marketing expertise. We have heard much about Remploy’s inability to go out and market its products. Remploy in Aberdeen would have been more than capable of competing for tenders if it was able to go out and actively market its products. PSN brought that expertise to the table for Glencraft, and the council reduced and deferred rents in order to allow the business time to grow, find its feet and develop as a social enterprise. There is still a role that the council can play in Aberdeen. We have heard that the site in Aberdeen that Remploy formerly occupied is up for sale. When the site was closed, Kevin Stewart and I called on the council to look at the possibility of purchasing it through the council’s common good fund. The Aberdeen common good fund currently sits at £73.8 million, with £7 million in cash. It would be capable of absorbing the purchase of a £250,000 or even a £400,000 factory site. There would then be the option of renting the site back to a social enterprise hub at a market rate. The current co-operative is based at the Twin Spires business park site. The option of purchasing the former Remploy site through the common good account and leasing it back at a market rent in order to allow a social enterprise hub to develop—the idea was that the factory site is ideally placed to host a number of social enterprises—could and should still be explored. I call on Aberdeen City Council, not on a partisan basis, but on a constructive basis, to look at the opportunity that that presents. The site would be a common good asset and there would be a common good rental income. It would be a win-win situation for the council and the social enterprise community in the north-east. I hope that the council will look at that idea.

The UK Government saying that £102 million will be taken out of the budget if something is done differently is another example of our hands being tied and our pockets being picked. The cabinet secretary mentioned the delay and confusion that there has been at UK Government level. What impact has that had on his ability to negotiate with unions and other stakeholders during the process?

I rise to speak to Drew Smith’s amendment 1. In the committee, I made it clear that I thought that the amendment that Drew Smith lodged at stage 2 involved an element of putting the cart before the horse, and I still think that that is the case with amendment 1. Paragraphs 2(a) and 2(b) of new section that the amendment would insert clearly state that the securing of the availability of advocacy services comes ahead of any determination of whether the individual requires or wishes the advocacy service to be provided. The minister’s amendment 23 will strengthen the bill, but I ask Drew Smith not to move his amendment, as he has not provided the clarity that I asked for in the committee.

I thank all the organisations that took the time to meet me or to contact me through email, Twitter or Facebook to give me their thoughts and concerns on the bill. It is clear that there is major interest in self-directed support, and I was pleased to be able to make a small but not insignificant change to the bill at stage 2. I thank Barnardo’s very much for its help in drafting the amendment that was successful. As my time is limited—for fully understandable reasons—I will focus on the issue of carers. I, too, am a member of the cross-party group on carers and believe that carers have a vital role to play. The bill puts the individual very much at the centre of the process and allows for a much greater degree of personal independence, but we should not forget the important role that carers play, often in situations in which the individuals whom they help may not be able to exercise their choices. It is clear from everything that the Government has said in its strategies that carers are a fundamental part of the process. I have seen at first hand the experience of carers prior to and following this Government coming to power, and I think that the shift in the prioritisation of carers has been quite dramatic. I look forward to the minister bringing forward the regulations, and I welcome the assurances that he has provided on charging in relation to carers. The regulations will be of critical importance, and I and my colleagues—and, indeed, carer organisations and individual carers—look forward to scrutinising them and discussing them in more detail.

Will the member take an intervention?

In an earlier intervention, Mr Findlay asked whether there was a crisis when Labour ran the college sector. I quote from an EIS response to a Scottish Executive consultation on changes to FE college boards of management: “The Executive will be familiar with the many critical situations which have developed during the past few years where two colleges have required direct intervention and many more have received specific cash injections to keep afloat.” Does Mr Findlay believe that that might have constituted a crisis on Labour’s watch?

I will make the same offer to Mr Kelly as I made to his colleague Mr Bibby the other week: if he can identify where we could extract funding in order to replace or increase funding in college budgets, we are more than happy to listen to him. Has he identified a budget line in that regard?

I will start by putting to bed the issue about bullying. On “Good Morning Scotland” on 17 November, Derek Bateman said: “we also spoke to the college lecturers association. They told us as far as they’re concerned there is no culture of ... bullying from government. The EIS said that bullying’s not an issue that they’re concerned with. They think actually that the publicity this has had has distracted from the real issues ... The civil service union, the PCS, said there was no sign of bullying or fear”. Let us put the matter straight to bed right now and instead talk about the reform that is necessary in the college sector. I have already quoted from a 2004 EIS response to a consultation by the then Scottish Executive on proposed changes to further education college boards of management. In the same response, the EIS also said: “It is, therefore, the view of the EIS that the continued atomisation of the further education sector through individually managed colleges is not in the best interests of students, staff or the public purse.” Eight years on, we finally have an education secretary who has grasped that bull by the horns and is driving forward the much-needed reform of the college sector that has been called for for many years. In the north-east, which I represent, the new regional lead for the Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire region will be Ken Milroy, the former chair of Aberdeen College. On his appointment to that position on 20 July, he said: “By planning on a regional basis we have the opportunity to re-think, re-shape and join up education to better meet the needs of learners in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. By sharing resources and engaging with businesses to maximise local career opportunities, we will further support the local and national economy.” That sharing of resources in the north-east will happen not just within the further education sector but between the FE sector and the higher education sector because, as well as collaboration between Banff and Buchan College and Aberdeen College, there will be collaboration with Robert Gordon University and the University of Aberdeen. Indeed, I suggest that the north-east provides a strong model of best practice that other areas should consider replicating.

No, thank you. Another point is that colleges across Scotland currently have £200 million in reserves. Having looked back at the Official Report of last week’s debate, I see that the Conservative finance spokesperson, Gavin Brown, said: “I note that Angela Constance and Marco Biagi think that the solution to our college crisis is to spend the reserves. We should not worry about what might come in the future; if we spend those reserves, everything will be absolutely fine.”—[Official Report, 14 November 2012; c 13468.] I know that Mr Brown is the finance spokesperson, but he clearly does not understand the concept of reserves. The reserves were built up during the good times. When we come into times of difficulty and when reform is required, that is when we should draw down the reserves to cushion colleges and to make the necessary changes through reform and reorganisation to drive things forward.

No thank you. Mr Brown can deal with that point in his summing up. My time is tight. That is what developing and building up reserves is for. [Interruption.]

I will make no apologies for speaking about the capital investment programme, because the fantastic new facility at Banff and Buchan College in Fraserburgh is delivering real benefits to students. The students now have better facilities, with a more special space that allows them to meet with their colleagues and to work together on group projects. In a rural setting in which many people have to travel great distances from home to attend college, it is especially important that students have a space that they can use outside the regular class environment. That new facility is also much more accessible—I take on board the cabinet secretary’s point about the need to ensure that outcomes are in place—which ensures that disabled learners, by which I mean not just the learning disabled but all disabled learners, are catered for. In addition, the new facility at Banff and Buchan College and the recladding project at Aberdeen College will help to drive down energy costs significantly. That will allow money to be spent on reinvestment in front-line services instead of being spent on heating and lighting inefficient buildings. That is a benefit that will be recognised and seen by students. Regionalisation will also provide local benefits through having a federal structure that will lead to increased efficiency and an enhanced learner experience. A jointly planned curriculum covering the whole region will be of benefit to learners because it will put them at the centre and it will align with identified demand across the north-east. That will also ensure that the colleges deliver break-even financial positions. However, the benefits will be felt not just within the north-east. Geoff Fenlon, the principal and chief executive of Carnegie College, has said that the 13 regional colleges “will present us all with a fantastic opportunity to create something new and exciting.” I think that we need to grasp that “new and exciting” opportunity and feed that into the wider collaboration not just within the further education sector but between further education and higher education. I emphasise again that the north-east region has best practice, which should be considered as such, in that regard.

Will the member give way?

As mentioned by my colleague Kevin Stewart, I served as a member of the Aberdeen airport consultative committee when I represented the Dyce, Bucksburn and Danestone ward in Aberdeen City Council, which is where Aberdeen airport is located. York Aviation’s report outlines the impact of air passenger duty rises. Indeed, the report clearly distinguishes between the impact of APD rises on short-haul travel and that on long-haul travel. That is important in the context of debate about short-haul flights versus direct flights. The report also focuses on the impact of APD rises on individual airports. Aberdeen airport, which is in my region, sustains the third-largest loss of passengers “at around 200,000 passengers per annum by 2016.” Patrick Harvie talked about the busiest October on record. Undoubtedly, there will be individual months when specific events taking place in the north-east encourage greater throughput of passengers, but it is worth looking at that figure as representing the overall picture. Indeed, the briefing provided by the Aberdeen and Grampian Chamber of Commerce said: “Air travel is particularly crucial to this part of Scotland because we are so geographically distant from London and from Europe’s key cities”. When an area is—as Aberdeen is—an extremely important part of the UK, Scottish and European economies, it is important to have some quick and readily available links in order to maintain a competitive edge. It is worth noting that, since January, aviation has been included in the European Union emission trading scheme, which will play its own part in relation to the climate change agenda. It is also worth commenting that one reason for using APD is to encourage planes to be filled up, because that is perhaps not happening at the moment. Indeed, WWF is encouraging airlines to fill planes and to use more efficient aircraft, a point that my colleague Stewart Stevenson highlighted. Ways are being looked at to incentivise more environmentally friendly forms of air travel, including the use of taxation levers in order to encourage that. We have heard the old refrain that APD is just a tax that we want to cut, but the obvious and important point to remember is that air passenger duty is not, by any stretch of the imagination, a progressive form of taxation. Regardless of one’s income level, one pays the same air passenger duty. All that that does is to put pressure on those on lower and middle incomes who may choose, as is their right, to use aviation as a means of transportation. It may be that some members want to see air travel once again become the preserve of the wealthy. That is fine if that is their position, but they should at least be honest about their intention. It does not behove any of us to exclude large numbers of Scottish society from accessing air travel for whatever reason, whether business or, indeed, pleasure. I take Alison Johnstone’s point about the comparative spend analysis. I am a great fan of the staycation and I encourage people who live in Scotland to holiday here. However, at the same time, we must respect that people will want to choose, on occasion, to holiday overseas, and we should not put unnecessary impediments in the way of them making that choice. What we should do is to look at ways in which we can incentivise environmentally conscious and friendly means of transportation in the aviation industry. I will always be willing to talk to members and to discuss with them how to operate incentivisation, but I absolutely disagree that we should hit people with sticks and expect them to modify their behaviour. That does not positively encourage behaviour modification; all that that does is make people resent the behaviour changes that they are faced with. It is worth noting that VAT is levied on top of air passenger duty. The notion of levying a tax on a tax is born of a uniquely UK Government perspective. That is relevant to the issues that we are discussing. I believe that the devolution of air passenger duty to the Scottish Parliament is essential. Alex Johnstone says that there is no guarantee that the duty would not rise. To him I say that the Government has set out its policy position and other parties can set out their policy positions. However, I also believe that, whatever decisions are taken, we would be in a position to decide air passenger duty based on the needs of Scotland. That is the underlying principle.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what the implications would be for the Scottish budget if income tax was reduced in Scotland. (S4O-01479)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the calls by the leader of the Conservative Party in Scotland for a reduction in income tax by up to 2p, which would remove about £1 billion from the budget, is yet another example of the economic illiteracy that defines the Tories? Does he agree that it is ridiculous to call for a debate on taxation while, at the same time, her party is denying Scotland the full powers of taxation that would allow us to grow our economy and deliver social justice for our people?

In the spirit of the honest debate that Mr Bibby claims to want, he will know that, in a fixed budget, if funding for colleges is to be increased, funding elsewhere must be reduced. What funding would he cut to replace the college funding? I see that Mr Henry is offering him some advice in that regard.

The cheek of a Tory to tell us how we should go about rebuilding the Scottish economy. I know that Murdo Fraser wanted to scrap the Conservative Party. Frankly, many people in Scotland wish that he had managed to achieve his aim. Who knows? Given the way things are going, he may yet get a second bite at that particular cherry. I was pleased that Liz Smith acknowledged that there has been a cut to the Scottish budget. That was welcome, because her leader seldom acknowledges it, and her finance spokesperson does not acknowledge the cuts that are coming to the Scottish budget. Indeed, they go out of their way to pretend that the cuts are not happening. I therefore welcome the honesty brought to this debate by Liz Smith. Would that some of her colleagues would take a leaf out of her book. At the same time, however, Liz Smith cannot come to the Parliament and realistically expect changes to be made to the funding landscape without shifting funds from other areas. I accept the points that were made in that regard, but what are the Conservatives doing? The Government in London ties our hands and picks our pockets. That is what is happening to the Scottish budget: our hands are tied in terms of how we can go about growing the economy, while at the same time this Parliament’s budget is being reduced. The leader of the Conservative Party in Scotland made a speech in which she called for the tax take to be cut in Scotland. She wants income tax to be cut in Scotland, but not by just the 1p that would take £0.5 billion out of the Scottish budget, as possibly more than £1 billion would be taken out. The Conservatives then have the nerve to come to this Parliament and demand that we reinstate funding in some areas, while they are out there in the communities of Scotland calling for less money to be available to the Scottish Government. That is a deeply dishonest position to take. They should at least have a little bit of humility when they come to the chamber and make those demands. Faced with the difficult choices that we are forced to take—it is interesting that those who come to the chamber and say that they want an honest debate about difficult choices are quick to run at the first sight of a debate about difficult choices—the cabinet secretary is driving forward reform of the college sector. I think that the regional approach will bring great benefits, not just to the sector but to the learners, who of course must be the most important people in this debate. It is worth noting that, even in these difficult times and faced with these difficult decisions, record funding is still being put into student support, which will ensure that students from vulnerable backgrounds can access further education without that being to their detriment. By contrast, in the situation south of the border, fees are crippling some people’s choices in higher and further education. When Neil Bibby was having his little rant about the money that is being taken out of the college sector, I asked him, in the spirit of the honest debate that he claims that he and his party want to have, how he would reduce one budget so that he can consequentially increase another budget. Even though he phoned a friend and Mr Henry was at his ear telling him what answer to give, he could not come up with an answer. The reason for that is simple: the answer would compromise another Labour front-bench spokesperson who comes to the Parliament to demand more money for their sector, to appease the people whom they seek to champion. All Labour is doing is deceiving people and leading them up the garden path by suggesting that if the Labour Party had its hands on the levers of power and the finances of the Parliament, there would somehow be an increase in available money and everyone could have more—

If Mr Johnstone wants to intervene he is welcome to do so. He asks about independence. We know that with independence we would be able to take decisions and use the full levers of the economy to grow our economy in Scotland. We would not be faced with the reductions in our capital budget that the Conservatives are foisting on us from Westminster, which are forcing us to take creative and welcome decisions in the Scottish budget to shift from resource to capital. It is worth remembering the large amount of capital funding for colleges. I often hear members pooh-pooh that, as if it is somehow not relevant. I commend to members of all parties the new state-of-the-art facility at Banff and Buchan College. They should take the opportunity to visit the college and hear about the improved staff morale and student experience and, most crucial, the reduced costs of the building. In a time of revenue constraint, the capital budget should be used to reduce revenue running costs, through development of new facilities or—as in the case of Aberdeen College at Gallowgate—refurbished facilities, which will permit the reinvestment in the front line of revenue that was being used to run inefficient buildings.

I direct the member to my previous comments about the decision that her colleagues at Westminster took to slash the capital budget that is available to the Parliament—[Interruption.]

The Conservative Party cannot come to the Parliament and expect us, without having control over the economy, to perform financial magic and make more money appear. We are refocusing the college agenda. We are reforming and regionalising, while delivering new facilities, which will improve the learner experience. In the north-east, a creative approach to partnership working with the private sector, which Dennis Robertson talked about, will deliver for learners and should be welcomed.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

It will be. A pensioner couple live next door to me in a house which is in the same council tax band as mine. I could probably afford to pay a several-hundred-pound hike in my council tax, but they could not. Why would it be fair for them to have to face that?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Sarah Boyack give way?

If all that Sarah Boyack says is true, why did the Labour Party in Stirling cut the council tax there?

Will Willie Rennie give way?

On the point about demographic change, does Willie Rennie agree that one of the ways to counter demographic change is to tailor an immigration policy to attract skilled working-age migrants? Does he agree that the immigration policies that are being pursued by the UK Government run counter to that and potentially damage Scotland’s ability to counter demographic change?

Will the member take an intervention?

While I was offering to make interventions during the debate, I was struck by the notion that nobody appears to take me seriously any more. Luckily, I do not either, so I am not really offended. I heard what Patrick Harvie said. When we talk about free services, we mean that they are free to access rather than free in terms of the cost of delivery. I absolutely agree with his point about the collectivism that lies behind those services. Today’s debate would be okay if we were talking in purely esoteric terms, but we also need to look at real people. Let us look at a 62-year-old woman who acts as a carer for her 66-year-old disabled husband. She also works in the local supermarket. Although she is in work, she qualifies for and receives a free bus pass as a result of being over the age of 60. That helps her to get to and from work, and enables her and her husband to use the bus to go around Scotland for holidays, and to go into town to access leisure pursuits. It also helps to reduce her outgoings because if she was not eligible for the free bus pass, she would have to pay to use the bus and would have to weigh that up in her weekly budget. She and her husband require a variety of medications, and thanks to free prescriptions, they do not have to worry about rationing their medication, which they had to do before. They also see the benefits of free personal care. I note that individuals are now being used to define the norm, but that is always dangerous when we consider free personal care. I speak to many people who receive benefits directly as a result of free personal care, and the difficulties that I have come across are often the result of the local decision-making process or the practices and staffing arrangements of particular private contractors. It is for individual members to take up those issues with local authorities rather than simply suggesting that they relate to the general principle or to the way in which central Government allocates funding to local authorities.

By admitting that he takes me seriously, Mr Malik has probably guaranteed that he will never go anywhere in the Labour Party. He made a point about members not taking the debate seriously, but I am not going to speak about where members from other parties are and what their commitments are. It would be wrong for me to do so. Most of my colleagues are committed to the agenda at hand. Mr Malik made a point about his hospital waiting time. My Glasgow colleague Bob Doris is sitting beside me. He is one of Mr Malik’s MSPs and I am sure that he would be happy to meet with him as a constituent to discuss the matter further and in detail. However, the point does not relate to the issue that we are dealing with today. I was speaking about a couple who are my constituents—

I want to make some progress. The couple I mentioned also benefit from the council tax freeze. The point that I made, which Ms Lamont chose, as is her right, to misrepresent, is that that couple and other low-income households benefit disproportionately from the council tax freeze in comparison with higher-income households. They save more as a proportion of their income than higher-income households, especially those that are in the same council tax band. The National Union of Students Scotland has sent us a briefing that reminds us that in 2011, all Labour, SNP, Liberal Democrat and Green MSPs signed a pledge that they would not introduce tuition fees in Scotland. The Tories did not sign up to the pledge, but we know their views on the matter. Labour members have argued today that we knew that tough choices were on the horizon, yet the SNP somehow did not see them coming. If that is the case the Labour MSPs who signed that pledge and who now tell us that free tuition at universities needs to be reviewed did not see them coming either. Perhaps they should have thought about that before signing the pledge. The NUS Scotland briefing says clearly that a “move away from the universality of undergraduate education would ... be an incredibly regressive step”, and that a benefit of free tuition is that it protects progression opportunities for Scotland’s college students. We should remember that many college students go on to university education. If we extend the logic that is being put forward, which is that a person’s income somehow dictates the services that they are entitled to access, that perhaps leads one to assume—

I am sorry; I am in my last 10 seconds.

Okay.

One would assume that if the choice was between free university tuition and college education—that is the choice that Johann Lamont seeks to advocate—the NUS would be four-square behind her, as defenders of college education and university education, but it is not calling for the Government to make such a choice. The NUS recognises that the Labour Party is presenting a false choice. If we extend and extrapolate from the logic that the Labour Party puts forward, it means that those whose income is above a certain level should send their children to private school and should take out private healthcare insurance, rather than mooch off the state. However, in our society, we recognise that certain benefits should be delivered on a universal basis. People pay taxation on the basis of their income and they are entitled to receive something back as a result, irrespective of their income. Universality removes stigmatisation. One of my constituents told me that, when they received their prescription for free at the chemist’s while others around them paid for their prescriptions, that marked them out as somebody who was on a low income and they felt stigmatised as a result. Many people had that feeling when they received free prescriptions while others had to pay.

By removing the need for people to pay for prescriptions, we have removed that stigmatisation and the feeling of a divide in Scottish society, and everybody benefits.

Will the member take an intervention?

Often when I speak in the Parliament I refer to the period that I spent as a local councillor in Aberdeen. Members will forgive me if I do so again. A development that was delivered during my time as a councillor was the Timmermarket clinic in Aberdeen, which was the first purpose-built one-stop centre in Scotland for people with drug misuse problems. The clinic was funded by a collaboration between Aberdeen City Council, NHS Grampian and the Scottish Government. The facility has about 20 rooms that are used for consulting and treatment, office accommodation, meeting rooms, waiting rooms, play areas for patients’ children and a courtyard garden. A team of about 30 people works there, including doctors, nurses, social workers, rehabilitation workers and admin staff, who deliver an intensive 16-week programme from the premises to patients who come in for treatment following GP referral. More than 450 patients used the Timmermarket clinic in its first six months, and it has become an extremely successful part of the drug treatment landscape in the north-east. I am sure that the Government will consider replicating the approach elsewhere. I have talked to drugs workers in the north-east and listened carefully to what they said about road to recovery. There is a degree of delight out there that we have a drugs strategy that is tailored towards and has a clear focus on recovery and which provides much-needed leadership. There is also delight at the great improvements in waiting times. In Aberdeenshire, which is one of the areas in the north-east that I represent, there are 1,400 or so drug addicts, of whom about 60 per cent are engaged in some form of rehabilitation or treatment scheme. On the stigma of drug use, we often face a difficulty to do with self-definition. Willie Rennie was right to talk about users who are at the lower end of the income scale, but Margo MacDonald was also right to say that there is a group of problem drug users who do not regard themselves as such. I am thinking about individuals with high disposable incomes who use particular types of drug in what they regard as a recreational way. They would be categorised as problem drug users, but they do not identify as such. There are issues with regard to how we address that, on which I am sure the minister is focusing.

I ask Mr Robertson to wait for one second while I finish my point. There is also an emerging problem with legal highs and the difficulties that they cause for the justice system and the treatment system.

That is part of the problem. There is a complex landscape of drug addiction out there. We are talking about individuals, and often about families too. The key is to strike a note of caution. As members of the Scottish Parliament, we hold a privileged position and are able to speak on a range of issues. We must be careful and cautious in the language that we deploy when we talk about issues such as drug abuse and misuse. We should be more careful in that regard, given the stigma that is often attached to the words and language that we use. We have seen unfortunate headlines in the recent past that relate to things such as needle exchanges, which are of great benefit in preventing the transmission of blood-borne viruses such as HIV and hepatitis. There have also been unfortunate headlines about the methadone programme. It is worth highlighting that fewer than one fifth of those who are currently in treatment are on some form of drug replacement, which would include methadone. There are not the huge numbers that one might assume exist. We must be careful to avoid a broad-brush negative stigmatisation of the methadone programme, which we have seen in some headlines. Such stigmatisation would only be detrimental to our efforts to get people who could have their lives stabilised through methadone to continue using it and to continue with the recovery programme. Recovery will differ for individuals. As Willie Rennie mentioned, there are circumstances that need to be tackled such as homelessness, deprivation and the chaotic lifestyles that many people lead. It is worth noting that we are talking about ordinary people. I could bring in my school yearbook and point to people who are now addicted to drugs. Many of us know people with whom we or our families grew up who are now addicted to drugs. We must be careful about the type of language that we use, the stigmatisation that can arise from using certain language and the difficulties that that can cause for those individuals whom we are trying to help to recover. Those are the people who matter most.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

The words and language that members deploy are key. We have a responsibility to use language in a careful manner that does not stigmatise extremely vulnerable individuals. Does Mr Macdonald not accept that that is the point that was being made?

I am keen to clarify something that I sought to clarify when I attempted to intervene on Mary Fee. She said that the strategy was failing and that a new direction was needed; she also felt that a wait of three weeks was too long. Is that the Labour Party’s position now? What alternative does it think should be offered? I have not heard much on that.

As a parent of two young children, the welfare of children and young people in Scotland is extremely close to my heart. I want to explore a number of issues, the first of which is the importance of corporate parenting. Early in my days as a councillor in Aberdeen, it was emphasised to me by my then group leader, one Councillor Kevin Stewart—whatever happened to him?—that it was extremely important that we took our roles as corporate parents seriously. It is important that members at all levels take up opportunities for training and involvement in corporate parenting strategies. I was often struck by the feeling that council members who were not part of the administration perhaps did not recognise or appreciate their role as corporate parents and felt that the responsibility and burden fell only on councillors who were part of the administration. It is perhaps worth re-emphasising to all local authority members that they have a role as a corporate parent, regardless of whether they are a member of their council’s administration. My colleague Kevin Stewart mentioned the good practice in Aberdeen City Council. When we talk about best practice, it is important that, rather than simply highlight it, we consider ways in which it can be shared with other local authorities. We have heard examples of areas where there might be room for improvement or where local authorities are not delivering what could be described as best practice. When a fostering and adoption service has been nationally recognised, as Aberdeen’s has, it should be highlighted to those councils as something to consider. During my time as a councillor in Aberdeen, investment was made in bringing children’s homes back up to a standard that allowed the council to bring children back to Aberdeen from out-of-area placements, which were often extremely expensive and counterproductive. Nanette Milne commented that we sometimes have to send children out of the area, and I agree that that will be necessary on occasion but, all too often in Aberdeen, it happened not because it was the best option, but because it was the only option, as the investment to enable placements within the local authority area simply had not been made. However, thanks to investment in, for example, the Willows children’s home and the Gilbert Road children’s home in my former council ward, we were able to reverse some of the decisions that had been taken, which had not proven to be the best decisions for the individuals or the local authority. We must also look at the wider children’s home estate and work out which homes are no longer fit for purpose. In Aberdeen, one home in my ward, the Netherhills children’s home, which was not fit for purpose, was closed. As well as investing, we must consider whether children’s homes are appropriate. Smashing some adoption myths is one of the most powerful things that we can do. It was pleasing to hear the comments from my colleague Joan McAlpine on age, which is often viewed as a barrier to people coming forward to adopt. The most important criterion for people adopting should be the ability to give love and security, and that can be fulfilled no matter what the age of the individual. We must get beyond the stigmatisation that all too often surrounds age. BAAF’s chief executive, David Holmes, has talked about the need to grapple with myths and to ensure that people do not rule themselves out of adoption, but rather rule themselves in. I agree with Margaret McDougall’s interesting point that we need to consider whether placements with the family are best. That is one reason why the Government’s work on kinship care, such as the introduction of kinship carer payments and the work to enshrine the role of kinship carers in statute as part of the forthcoming children and young people bill, is extremely important. One point that has rung true throughout the debate is about the importance of having children at the centre. I have listened carefully to many members saying that we need to speed up the process. I agree that, in many cases, the process takes far too long, but for me the most important thing is to ensure that we get the process right for the child, rather than simply do it quickly. If we can improve speed and still get it right for the child, that is a winning combination, but we should never sacrifice the rights of the child simply for speed of process. That must be our main focus. BAAF’s national adoption week website has been collecting the wishes of children who want to be adopted. I will take the opportunity to share some of those wishes, which go from the touching to the amusing. Phoebe, aged five, says: “I wish for a family that can show me love and patience”. Robbie, aged four, and his brother Simon, aged six, say: “We wish to have a family who will look after us, give us cuddles and have fun with us”. There is also Ellie, aged four, who wishes “for a mummy who will make my hair look nice”. We then have Jack, aged five, who says: “I wish for a monkey, puppies and cats and dogs”. If anybody watching the debate or reading the Official Report has a monkey at home, they could be the person Jack is looking for. Lastly, we have Corey, aged seven, who says: “I wish for two dads so I don’t have to share with my younger brother”. On the days when I have one child in my arms and the other child tugging at me to get my attention, I can sympathise with that sentiment.

I, too, congratulate my colleague Adam Ingram on securing the debate and on his extremely informative speech, from which I certainly learned many things that I did not already know regarding William Murdoch. As my colleague highlighted, there is a reception in the garden lobby following the debate to tie in with the gas@200 celebrations, and all members are more than welcome to attend. It was pointed out that Murdoch failed to profit from his invention because he did not patent it, but it is also worth noting that Boulton and Watt also failed to recognise the potential of the domestic market and the major contribution that Murdoch’s invention had made and that they abandoned the gas market in 1814. Given the many inventions that they patented, that was perhaps a major error on their part. Kenneth Gibson talked about Murdoch’s discovery in 1795 of an alternative to isinglass, which is a substance used in the brewing industry to remove impurities. It is actually obtained, rather tastefully, from the swim bladder of fish. In 1795, when Murdoch made his discovery, isinglass was exclusively produced from sturgeon—specifically, beluga sturgeon—which was extremely expensive to import and cost the brewing industry a great deal. Murdoch discovered that it was possible to substitute dried cod for sturgeon, which made the brewing industry a significant saving. Indeed, it was considered such a significant discovery that the Committee of London Brewers paid him £2,000—which, at that time, was a fairly substantial sum—to use his invention and end their dependence on imports. Members have gone through the list of the various inventions in which Mr Murdoch played a significant part, even if he did not develop them entirely himself. It strikes me as rather odd that, when I went through school, his was not one of the prominent names that were mentioned. I think of a recent episode of “QI”, in which Stephen Fry listed all the things that were invented by Scots. The list was extensive, but not necessarily exhaustive, because I am pretty sure that some of the inventions that we have spoken about this evening did not feature in it. Perhaps that highlights the need to make people more aware of individuals such as Murdoch and the significant contributions that they have made to the world. I am a representative of the north-east of Scotland. The gas industry is a major employer there and an important part of the north-east and wider Scottish economy. In Peterhead, we have the St Fergus gas terminal, which is a massive facility and a significant employer. I am sure that the debate is fascinating for those who are interested in seeing how different Scots contributed to the modern world, but we should not forget that many people also now owe their employment and livelihoods to the discoveries that were made by people such as William Murdoch. It is only right and proper that my colleague Adam Ingram secured the debate to highlight Mr Murdoch’s fantastic achievements. Let us hope that, as we move forward, those achievements are recognised more fully by Scots throughout our nation.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member not accept that anybody who is over the limit for drink-driving is the problem?

At the start of Alex Johnstone’s speech, I thought that I was going to agree with everything that he said—and then it all went a bit wrong. I do not understand where he was going with his notion of unintended consequences. To me, if someone is over the limit they are over the limit and need to be dealt with. If Alex Johnstone is suggesting that people will focus on soft targets, I say to him that people who are over the limit are, by definition, a problem and need to be dealt with. Whether they are only slightly over the limit or significantly over the limit, the point is that they are over the limit. I was interested in his view that the real problem is people who are significantly over the limit. A National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence review in 2010 estimated that, with the proposed new limit of 50mg, road fatalities would drop by 13.8 per cent and road injuries would decrease by 1.4 per cent within six years. I would wager that, if only the people currently significantly over the 80mg limit were the problem, we would not see that kind of statistic result from dropping the limit.

Alex Johnstone was reluctant to tell us the background to his statistics and I am quoting the statistics that I have in front of me. Those were the results of the review in relation to reducing the limit. Like James Dornan, I do not drink—this feels like some sort of inverse confessional—but I used to drink. However, I always took the view that if I was driving somewhere, even for a night out, I would not drink a drop of alcohol. I agree strongly with Alex Johnstone that a person can never tell what the impact of a drink will be on them, as it can affect them differently depending on how much sleep they have had and on how much they have had to eat that day. It can have different impacts depending on the circumstances. It is not just about how alcohol affects the individual, but how it can affect them differently on a day-by-day basis. That is why I think that it is far better to err on the side of not drinking than to take the risk. I turn to the issue of campaigns and social attitudes. The Lancet has described being arrested for drink-driving in Sweden as “a social and personal catastrophe”. By contrast, the president of the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents, David O’Connor, has stated that “drink-driving is still seen as socially acceptable in some quarters.” There is, therefore, an attitudinal issue to address. An Ipsos MORI poll on attitudes to the drink-driving limit that I caught sight of today shows that there is strong agreement with the proposal to reduce the drink-driving limit to 50mg. Support for that is strongest in the over-55 age group—at 73 per cent—which bears out James Dornan’s testimony about those who remember the hard-hitting anti-drink-driving campaigns. Interestingly, the poll demonstrates that support for the reduction is weakest in the 18-to-24 age group, which emphasises the need for education. It makes the point that we need to focus on a generation who have missed the hard-hitting messages. There have been some welcome campaigns, such as this year’s mourning after campaign in Grampian, which was launched in June. In May, there were 45 arrests for drink-driving in Grampian, which demonstrates the difficulties that are faced. The mourning after campaign called on members of the public to report drink-drivers. People often know that somebody has left a pub or club with the intention of driving but they do not take the step of reporting that individual. They then find out the next day that the individual was involved in an accident and think to themselves, “If only I’d reported them.” It is not just about the attitude of the person who takes the reckless step of drink-driving; it is also about the individuals who are aware that the person is drink-driving and their responsibility to ensure that the person is not allowed to cause damage, harm or a fatality.

I may be failing in my clear duty to be the Conservative Party’s statistician in this debate, but I am afraid that I do not have those data. If the Conservative Party’s argument is that some drink-drivers may go significantly over the 80mg limit and that that will not change with a reduction of the limit to 50mg, I contend that by having the highest alcohol-limit allowance in Europe—if not one of the highest in the world—we set up an attitude that it is okay to take a drink. The notion that people can take a drink and still be under the limit in some circumstances sets in train the notion that taking a drink and driving is okay, which perhaps leads to more reckless conduct. We need to address that attitude. The notion that dropping the drink-driving limit to 50mg will not affect those who will drink and drive recklessly is not necessarily an argument for not dropping the drink-driving limit, based on some of the statistics that I have read out today. Another campaign that is run in the Grampian area is the driving ambition scheme, which is a multi-agency effort involving Grampian Police, car maintenance experts, driving instructors and the fire brigade. That wide-ranging course includes a focus on drink-driving, and while those sorts of campaigns and seasonal campaigns—

Presiding Officer, I have taken two interventions and some members have already spoken for longer than seven minutes. I will simply say that the education matter is something that needs to be dealt with on a much more targeted basis. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will take that on board.

On a linked but slightly tangential point, when I was at university the student union operated a designated driver scheme whereby people who were driving were given vouchers that they could exchange for free soft drinks. Is that an initiative that publicans and clubs, for example, should consider to encourage responsible driving behaviour?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Looking at the issue purely on first principles, does Mr Brown believe that subsiding empty properties is a justifiable and good use of taxpayers’ money?

Earlier this afternoon, I spoke on the subject on the BBC alongside Mr Brown’s colleague, Jackson Carlaw. The BBC had spoken to representatives of the Aberdeen business improvement district who welcome the legislation and think that it will be beneficial in bringing empty properties back into use. Perhaps Mr Brown wishes to take that on board.

Does the member think that the UK will be in or out of the EU any time in the next five or 10 years?

I will do my best to approach the debate with the same level of humility and respect that Mr Henry managed—or perhaps a lot more. Mr Henry talked about the notion that either we remain part of the UK or we face an uncertain future as an independent country. I was interested by his words, because their implication is that if Scotland remains part of the UK its future is, by definition, certain. However, when I intervened during the leader of the Conservative Party’s speech—I am pleased that she has decided to drop the vaudeville act that she rolled out at First Minister’s question time to such universal acclaim—she responded that she could not confirm or deny that the UK will remain a member of the EU in five or 10 years’ time. Indeed, yesterday evening, the Radio 4 programme, “Analysis”, looked at the Labour Party’s relationship with the European Union. A commentator said that he thought that there was a 50:50 chance of the UK withdrawing from the European Union within the lifetime of the next UK Parliament. He thought that the party that is most likely to take the UK out of the European Union is the Labour Party. That demonstrates that even if Scotland remained in the UK, our future in the European Union would be uncertain. We can say with some certainty, based on the precedent of Greenland and Sweden, that a country’s starting point as an independent nation is that it is inside the European Union and it can then negotiate the terms of its withdrawal, should it wish to withdraw. We also see, from the example of Sweden and the noteworthy points that Aileen McLeod made, that a country’s being a member of the European Union does not automatically mean that it is a member of the eurozone. Aileen McLeod made that point clearly, but of course we heard from Labour members that a person’s professional expertise is clouded by their political persuasions. On that basis, we probably should not pay attention to the Advocate General for Scotland, Lord Wallace, or to the cuts commission proposals that Professor Arthur Midwinter, a former adviser to the Labour Party, will bring forward. However, if we are setting those parameters and saying that a person’s political persuasions undermine their ability to engage in a debate, we have reached a sorry state indeed. It is disappointing that this debate is purely about process. My eye was caught by an article in the Morning Star on 24 June, in which it said: “Left Labour MSP Neil Findlay said the referendum debate so far had been tedious.” The article went on to quote Mr Findlay as saying: “The people who inhabit planet normal”— I assume that he counts himself as one of those— “are bored ... The labour movement needs to cut through the” BS “and the sideshows and focus on the type of Scotland we want to see”. I could not agree more with Neil Findlay. I know that he has said that he never agrees with the Scottish National Party, but I charitably suggest that I agree with him that this debate should be about the kind of Scotland that we all want.

I accept that Mr Malik does not think that Scotland would be denied membership of the EU. Our position is clear. Unlike Turkey, we are already in the European Union and therefore we are a member state of the EU, as part of the UK. EU citizenship rights are afforded to our citizens, which is not currently the case in Turkey. The situation is not analogous. The point is that this debate should be about what kind of Scotland we want to see in future. There will be differences of opinion. The better-together parties often have fun with the suggestion that, because Patrick Harvie and I share a different vision for the future of Scotland, the yes campaign is riven with splits. I hope that the Labour Party and the Tory party do not have exactly the same apocalyptic vision of the future—[Interruption.] I often have my doubts on that. People should be asking themselves, “What do I want Scotland to look like in future? How do I want Scotland to develop?” They should then ask themselves whether that vision becomes more or less likely as a result of Scotland becoming independent.

I am sorry. I am in my final 40 seconds. My vision is for a socially just future for Scotland. A future for Scotland without nuclear weapons and a future for Scotland that delivers the kind of human decency and dignity to our citizens that we would all expect—not just for ourselves or for our relatives, but for our fellow Scots—is more likely as a consequence of independence. It is more likely as a consequence of our taking control of our resources, whether they are natural, financial, or human resources. That is the point around the vision debate and it would be good if, just for a change, the Labour Party could heed the words of Neil Findlay—I am probably never going to repeat that phrase. We need to get away from the sideshows and the process-laden nonsense and start talking about what the vision is for the future of Scotland. If, as Mr Henry asserts, Labour has a positive vision of a certain future for Scotland within the UK, let us hear what it is, because all I see at the moment for people on welfare and for public sector workers who are looking at their pension issues is a future that is riven with uncertainty as part of the United Kingdom. Let us have an honest debate about the Scotland that we all want.

Will the member take an intervention?

As somebody who visited the residents of the Menie estate, I wonder whether Mr Macintosh could remind me and the chamber, first, on whose watch Mr Trump was first invited to Scotland and, secondly, what role his party played in supporting the Trump development both locally and nationally.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is my recollection from my time as a local councillor that the funding for repairs to the road network to deal with potholes, for example, came from councils’ capital budgets and not their revenue budgets, so I am not entirely sure what point the member thinks that she is making.

Does the member agree that another issue that arises is when the road is dug up—by a utility company, for example—and then not properly filled in or patched up correctly, which allows ice to get into gaps, creating potholes? The issue is whose responsibility it is to pick up the tab for the repair work.

I say at the outset that I would like to be able to spend more money on everything, but the simple fact is that we operate within a fixed budget. Even if we were to decide to allocate more money from the Scottish Government budget to local authorities—which seems to be what the Labour Party would like us to do; it will be interesting to hear what its members say in the budget debate on that—there is no guarantee that those local authorities would choose to prioritise winter maintenance funding. The whole concept of local decision making is that it is for local authorities to decide their priorities. I have not heard any councillor from any party call seriously for us to go back to ring fencing specific local authority budgets. The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has not called for that; indeed, COSLA welcomes the fact that councils can now take decisions on local priorities, rather than being told how the money that they are allocated by central Government is to be spent.

Indeed—like Stirling Labour, which cut the council tax. I think that most people would accept that that was a rather irresponsible thing to do while complaining that councils are not funded properly. If councils are not being funded properly, why was Stirling Council able to cut the council tax? It is clear from his speech that my colleague Richard Lyle is gunning for the Mercedes/BMW driver vote. I say to him that, although Mercedes and BMW are German, so, too, is schadenfreude. Perhaps we should encourage drivers of such vehicles to consider measures such as winter tyres, as well as pointing to the difficulties that they can experience in icy conditions. The maintenance of our road and footpath networks is an important issue. Aberdeen City Council, as a member of which I served until May of this year, currently has 16,726 tonnes of salt in stock. That compares with a stock of 15,986 tonnes in the previous year. Interestingly, the salt usage in that year was only 8,088 tonnes. That is a significant fall compared to the usage the year before that, perhaps reflecting the milder winter that we had. Nonetheless, that also demonstrates a much better strategy for salt usage by the council than perhaps had been the case in previous years. Another issue is whether there are other means by which roads and footpaths can be treated, rather than simply using salt. The council has purchased 24,000 litres of a substance called Eco-Thaw, which it intended to trial in 2011-12. The conditions under which Eco-Thaw is most effective in comparison with salt—hard-packed snow and ice—were not prevalent in 2011-12, but Eco-Thaw remains at the council’s disposal. Potholes are an important issue, on main routes and on side roads. I am glad that Alex Johnstone agreed with my earlier comment that it is not always the case that potholes are due to poorly maintained roads. Often utility companies or others dig up roads and do not repair them properly, which leads to gaps in the surface through which water ingress occurs. Ice then forms and we get potholes. We need to look at whether utility companies perhaps bear some of the responsibility on some occasions and whether there should be some discussion around the possibility of their perhaps putting forward some funding towards repair, rather than it simply being the responsibility of local or central Government. The other issue that we have to consider is how best to develop community resilience. I speak to a number of elderly residents in the north-east of Scotland and many of them go back to the days when neighbours looked out for one another and when people gritted their own paths and the areas outside their homes. We have gone back from that in a way. I live in a street that will frankly never be top of the priority list for the council, not just because I live on it, but because it is not an access route to anywhere. It is essentially a road where you come in at one end and leave at the other and it does not connect to anything. Therefore, in the past I have gone out and gritted areas on my street when necessary, particularly where there are elderly residents. We should look at encouraging the development of that kind of community resilience and that kind of neighbourly spirit. My colleague Graeme Dey mentioned Mike Weir’s bill. Compared with the frankly archaic, nonsensical system of members’ bills in Westminster, where members have to go through a bizarre, byzantine lottery, our process in the Scottish Parliament much better enables back-bench members to involve themselves. I mentioned driver behaviour and the use of winter tyres, but many of us will have noted, particularly as the mornings get darker, that there are many drivers who do not use their headlights when they should. When we get into more severe winter weather, that becomes a significant safety concern. I know that in Scandinavia, for example, there are rules and regulations on the use of headlights. Perhaps we need to reflect on that point, given the weather conditions that we often face in Scotland.

I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing the debate. I also welcome the members of the cross-party group on dyslexia who have attended the debate, and I pay tribute to young Ellie Gordon-Woolgar. I was involved in the debate in the chamber this afternoon and saw many of my colleagues arriving wearing the ribbon. I thought that I had missed my opportunity and had to run out, get my ribbon and run back in. Luckily, I made it back in time for voting; otherwise, although I would have been wearing a very nice ribbon, the whips would not have been very happy with me. Even since I was at school—which was more recently than some other members in the chamber—a great distance has been travelled. I remember the difficulties that some of my peers at school faced in relation to dyslexia, not just in getting it diagnosed but in the tolerance of some teachers towards dyslexic pupils. We have travelled some distance since then. I am not going to argue that there is not still more work to be done, but even in that short space of time there has been welcome progress. It was interesting to hear Nanette Milne and Margaret Mitchell mention some dyslexia sufferers who are prominent in Scottish public life. Sir Jackie Stewart’s story has always fascinated me. I have been a formula 1 fan for many years and I remember watching a documentary about Sir Jackie’s struggle with dyslexia. His tale of his experience at school was quite harrowing, as he was made to feel almost inadequate as a student simply because of his challenges with dyslexia. In an article, he is quoted as saying: “I can still remember every braking distance and gear change I needed to get around the Nürburgring circuit in Germany—and there were 187 corners when I raced there—but I can’t get through my alphabet.” That remarkable quote sets in context the challenge that is often faced by individuals with dyslexia. The other point is that Sir Jackie’s experience demonstrates that there is no limit to what can be achieved by someone with dyslexia. People such as Sir Jackie and the other prominent Scots that Margaret Mitchell mentioned stand testament to the fact that dyslexia ought not to be a barrier to going on to great success in childhood or adulthood.

I will take a very brief intervention.

Thank you, Presiding Office. I was about to ask for that. I associate myself entirely with Claudia Beamish’s remarks. I represent North East Scotland and prior to entering Parliament I was a member of Aberdeen City Council. In Aberdeen, a specialist dyslexic unit at Kaimhill primary school has existed since 1991. Thanks to the fantastic three Rs school programme, that unit now sits in a fantastic building where an excellent educational experience is provided to children. That demonstrates that a lot of work has been done over time in relation to dyslexia. The council noted that there were variations in assessment and intervention across the city. In September 2011, it therefore launched new dyslexia practice guidelines following collaborative work with Aberdeen College, Robert Gordon University and the University of Aberdeen. That collaborative approach is welcome. An interesting thing about the guidelines—this perhaps links to Claudia Beamish’s point—is that they also cover the transition to post-school education. We often focus on dyslexia at school education level, but there are often difficulties in the transition to further or higher education or to the workplace. I hope that the minister will set out in his summing up how the Government intends to help individuals with dyslexia to cope with those transitions and how it will help organisations to support that process.

I am delighted that 16 and 17-year-olds will be given the right to vote on the future of their nation. Will the cabinet secretary expand on her statement with regard to how the Scottish Government plans to ensure that all 16 and 17-year-olds are able to vote? What role does she see for partners such as schools, colleges and other organisations in encouraging and educating 16 and 17-year-olds in relation to voter registration?

6. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will fulfil its commitment to deliver free prescriptions. (S4F-00906)

The First Minister will have noted that, earlier this week, his counterpart in Wales, the Labour First Minister, said: “We believe it’s important that we have an NHS that’s free at the point of delivery. We are not going to change the policy on free prescriptions.” Nye Bevan, the founder of the NHS, resigned from Government over the introduction of prescription charges; does the First Minister agree that free prescriptions are an integral part of the NHS, and that Labour in Scotland, in suggesting the reintroduction of prescription charges, has lost its social democratic principles by simply aping Tory policies?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with Aberdeen City Council regarding improvements to the Haudagain roundabout. (S4O-01339)

As the minister will be aware, the traffic modelling for the Haudagain roundabout improvements showed that the works would be effective only if the third Don crossing were developed as planned. Given that Aberdeen City Council’s Labour-led administration is now considering relocating the crossing or possibly scrapping it altogether, does the minister agree that such a move would put the Haudagain improvement works back at square one and would mean further expenditure by both council and Government and another lengthy planning and modelling exercise? Would it not be far better if the council administration stuck to the original plans for the third Don crossing, which would help to tackle congestion in the city?

Will the member take an intervention?

It is possibly the lowest form of politics to bring another member’s family into a debate and use it as an argument. Hugh Henry rose— No, Mr Henry, you will sit down and you will listen. To bring Derek Mackay’s family into the debate and use it as an argument against him is one of the most despicable things that a politician could do.

Mr Henry is right that it is about choice, and I want to speak about someone whom I have the right to speak about in relation to choice. I am a member of Aberdeen City Council, which faces tough budget choices. Frankly, I think that the pernicious lie that removing the council tax freeze would have allowed us to simply wish away those tough choices demeans the debate. Those tough choices would have remained. We faced tough choices around our additional support needs and learning disability budgets and we took the decision to make reductions in those knowing that we needed to reshape the services. I have an autistic son, so do not dare tell me that the members of this party do not understand how to make tough choices when family members enter into the frame, Mr Henry. Allow me to quote from Campbell Christie, because the Labour Party has made it clear that it wants to talk about the Christie commission. In an interview with Holyrood magazine, he said: “People say we can’t afford things now but in 1948 we couldn’t afford the NHS and the pension schemes but we did it ... The politicians of that era were determined that the supportive community environment should be underpinned by state provision, even in the most difficult of economic situations.” Those of us on the Government benches have chosen our priorities. We set them out to the people in 2011. In many instances, the Labour Party backed us on those priorities either in votes in the chamber or in the priorities in its manifesto. Indeed, a recent visit to the Labour website showed a list of things such as free prescriptions, free personal care and the council tax freeze as policies that the Labour Party was seeking to advance. We hear Labour Party politicians quoting Nye Bevan to us, forgetting that Nye Bevan resigned from the Government over the introduction of prescription charges, so free prescriptions are entirely in keeping with the spirit of Nye Bevan and what he wished to espouse. I mentioned tough choices in Aberdeen. One would think that if the Labour Party was staying true to the mantra that Johann Lamont espoused, the Labour Party in Aberdeen would have joined in the debate and outlined tough choices. Did it at any stage move an alternative budget from opposition? No. Did it at any stage engage in the discussion around the choices that the council had to make? No. Instead, it carped and moaned from the sidelines, because when the going gets tough, the Labour Party gets going.

As he is one of the main culprits, I give Mr Baker the opportunity to atone for his sins.

That is an interesting comment from Mr Baker, because one of the reasons why we had to make those tough choices was the Labour Party’s profligacy when it was the administration. The call comes out from Labour members that they want to have a debate. We need to know Labour’s position before we can have a debate. It is not good enough to simply stand up and say that we must have a debate. [Interruption.]

Johann Lamont began her speech by saying that she did not want to just sit back and criticise the Government. She then spent 14 minutes criticising the Government. We want to know what the Labour Party’s position is on these issues. It is not enough to simply stand up and say that we need to discuss whether we can afford to do these things or whether it is right to afford to do these things. This party has laid out its position and said that it believes not only that it can afford to do these things but that it is right to do these things and that it is to the benefit of the Scottish people to do these things. The Labour Party cannot simply stand up and say, “We need to have a debate, but you’ll have to wait until 2015 to know what our position in the debate is going to be, because that is when our commission will report back.” Over the past year, we have heard calls from the Labour Party for an extra £37.8 million for colleges, £100 million for housing, around £0.75 billion to re-regulate buses, £25 million for fuel poverty, £22.1 million for an air route development fund, £10 million for kinship carers, £65.19 million for NHS nurses, £20 million back into the Crown Office, £136.6 million for job creation, £319 million back into the NHS budget, £24,500 to charities, £4.6 million to the video game industry—

To continue, £1 million for the inquiry into the PIP implants, £1 million for a public inquiry into the legionnaire’s disease outbreak, £2.4 million to reinstate cuts to drug misuse budgets and £2 million to reinstate the cut to the Scottish Court Service. That is a grand total of £1.5 billion in spending calls in the past year alone from Labour Party members.

As my colleague Mr Hepburn says, a large number of those calls came from Jackie Baillie. Even if we were to take the Labour Party’s position on universality to the extreme and cancel all the universal benefits, it would not pay for those spending requirements. Where, exactly, is the tough-choice agenda there?

Mr Chisholm might not wish to hear this, but I have had a great deal of respect for him as a politician ever since he resigned from Tony Blair’s Government over a cut to benefits for single parents. Should those same single parents be forced to go through the ignominy of means testing for some of the benefits that this Government is providing to them for free?

Will the member give way?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the United Kingdom Government’s rejection of the final offer from Remploy Aberdeen. (S4O-01333)

Does the minister agree that, by inviting Remploy Aberdeen to submit a best and final offer only to then reject it, the UK Government has in effect led these people up the garden path and shown a total disregard for and lack of understanding of the work that is being done on site to develop a social enterprise hub? Although I welcome the earlier announcement of a future chamber debate on Remploy and although I intend to be at the meeting with Esther McVey, I wonder whether the minister is happy to meet me and other interested members to look at how not only the individuals but the social enterprises on the site can be supported in future.

He is not that old—[Laughter.]

In the spirit of honesty and hard choices that I know that Labour is espousing, will Elaine Murray therefore advise which budget she would reduce in order to fund the increases in BSOG and EGIP that she is clearly looking for?

I welcome the green bus fund that the Government announced in its recent budget. It is fair to say that there clearly is support across the chamber for the initiative, given the speeches that we have heard today. I want to say a little bit about the situation in Aberdeen. I, too, attended the hybrid bus launch, along with Kevin Stewart and the minister. It was great to see that work to deliver hybrid buses in Aberdeen. I agree with Kevin Stewart that they are fantastic vehicles, and I think that they are going to be extremely popular on the city routes that they serve. I hope that we will see more of them being rolled out in Aberdeen. I am also pleased to see Aberdeen City Council’s work with partners on hydrogen buses. My colleague, Kevin Stewart, did himself a little bit of a disservice in that he was, when he was deputy leader of the council, very much involved in the genesis of the moves towards unlocking the hydrogen bus funding, so he deserves credit and recognition for the work that he did behind the scenes, and for the lobbying work that he has done, since becoming the MSP for Aberdeen Central, to ensure that funding was provided from other agencies and organisations, including Scottish Enterprise. We heard the criticism that the fund tends to benefit the larger operators, but we are seeing—especially through the second stage of the fund—small bus companies benefiting, too. I was happy to see Deveron Coaches of Macduff in the north-east of Scotland being one of the beneficiaries of round two of the green bus fund. It received almost £175,000. That is a sign that smaller bus companies and operators are able to access the fund. I am sure that the minister will join me in encouraging other bus operators, of whatever size, to access the fund to assist their business in the future. The green bus fund has another role to play as part of a wider effort to shift attitudes in society. I congratulate Jim Hume on revealing his purchase of a hybrid car. I note that he made it quite clear that he has not bought a hybrid bus and I understand that the reason for that is that, these days, the Lib Dems need only a car for their day trips. I will leave that to one side and say that Jim Hume deserves credit for taking that step. The Government is putting up money through the green bus fund, but we also need to encourage private enterprise to look at what it can do with, for example, car manufacturers. Alex Johnstone made that point when he talked about what private businesses could do to drive down costs to ensure that we get a bigger bang for our buck. Other areas of the transport network could look at the technologies that are being implemented and see whether they can play a role. Government money is finite and we are living in difficult economic times, so it would be unrealistic to assume that the Government can throw vast sums of money at every area of the transport network to develop technologies. That is an opportunity to say that this is the direction of travel—for want of a better pun—and that we want other sectors of the transport network to look at whether they can play a role in reducing emissions in the future. I am sorry to say that I do not think that I will support the Labour amendment at decision time. Labour members do not seem to understand how a debate works. They keep calling for an honest debate, but for a debate to occur, there need to be two distinct positions. The Government is laying out its policy agenda and priorities as part of the budget. If the Labour Party wants to disagree with those, that is fine, but it needs to say what it would do differently and how it would do it. It is not enough for the Labour Party to say that it wants the Government to address the cut to BSOG and then, when it is asked what we should do in order to fund that, to say that it is not going to make up policy on the hoof. That is not an honest position. The Labour Party must come to the chamber and outline an alternative direction. If the Labour Party wants to have an honest debate, let us have it.

There will be a gold star winging its way from the Labour Party leadership to Mr Findlay for parroting the line that Johann Lamont was peddling on the television last night. The Government is quite clear that it can afford to fund the concessionary travel scheme, the council tax freeze, free prescriptions and free university education for Scotland’s young people. If the Labour Party disagrees with that and does not think that we should fund those things, or thinks that they should be funded differently, it should come to us and tell us what we should be doing instead, and we will have that debate. To open up a debate that is going to consist of two years of whingeing before a policy document emerges is not honest. I would be happy to debate with Labour members any day of the week, but they have to have an articulate and coherent position. That would be a start to an honest debate.

I have suggested to Aberdeen City Council that it look at whether the current operating times for, and the locations of, bus lanes in the city are appropriate. Does Patrick Harvie believe that councils should constantly consider whether bus-lane provision is appropriate in dealing with the often changing times of rush-hour traffic?

6. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s position is on the study published by the New Economics Foundation relating to a halt to mackerel fishing. (S4F-00859)

The report has caused considerable concern in north-east communities, where mackerel fishing is a key part of the industry. Will the First Minister advise what the Scottish Government is doing to influence the UK Government and others to ensure that some of the more extreme approaches that are outlined in the report do not gain traction elsewhere and are not pursued? Does he agree that it would be easier to advocate on behalf of the Scottish fishing industry if we had a seat at the top table as an independent Scotland at the heart of Europe?

As I will join the Health and Sport Committee next week as a new member, I feel that I will join the inquiry in the role of a half-time substitute. I look forward to playing an active role in the remainder of the inquiry. I was not a member of the committee when I made my bid to speak in this debate, but that is how life works out sometimes. I, too, was interested in the notion of walking football. It made me think that John Park has been telling tales about my midfield performances for the Parliament football team. I make him look quick, so that must be where the comment came from. The Olympics and Paralympics over the summer made me cast my mind back to when I was an active member of Aberdeen Amateur Athletics Club, which was a good few years and a good few stones ago. However, I recall that when I was a member there was a young athlete there—a sprinter—who competed well as a young lad. His name is Neil Fachie, and he was a gold medallist in cycling at the recent Paralympic games. That emphasises Patricia Ferguson’s point, which is one that I recognise. Elite athletes do not just happen; they often get their start in sport in community clubs, with the coaching and encouragement that they get at that level. As Patricia Ferguson said, often a keen PE teacher or other teacher who takes a sports club spots a child’s potential to develop their skills. Patricia Ferguson might be worried that I am agreeing with her so much, because I also agree about the role that coaches play. Before I was elected to the Parliament, I was a youth football coach for Dyce Boys Club FC. Coaches have a key role and are often dedicated volunteers. Sometimes they are parents whose son or daughter is or has been involved with the club and who want to give something back. The key considerations are qualifications and support. I was lucky in that Dyce Boys Club was proactive about putting coaches forward for coaching badges as well as first aid courses, so that coaches could react if there was a significant injury and a player needed assistance on the pitch. That does not happen at every club, and often there is no such support network. We need to consider what we can do to encourage people to get their coaching badges and so on, because that will help the children who are involved in the club to get better at the sport.

I am always interested in such things. We must think about what we can deliver with the resources that are available. The member made a valid point. Many clubs have tight resources and I know from my time as a youth football coach how expensive it is to run a football club. Community sport needs local support. I was disappointed by the vote in Aberdeen City Council on the football hub and community stadium. Council chiefs met SFA officials in August to discuss the council’s wish to set up a regional hub for football in Aberdeen. The SFA responded that it did not need to set up a regional hub, because there were three suitable facilities in the pipeline—the sports village, the Cove Rangers FC stadium and the Aberdeen FC stadium—which could deliver that. The Labour Party then told the SFA to stay out of politics, despite having invited the association to comment in the first place, and then voted down the community stadium, by taking the lease back on land at Calder Park. We need to look at what local councils are doing as well as at what the Government is doing.

3. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to address trends in drink-driving among young drivers. (S4O-01288)

Recent meetings that I have had with Grampian Police suggest that there is a trend towards younger drivers being more likely to be found to be under the influence of alcohol when stopped. Does the cabinet secretary agree that as well as the welcome measures that are being taken by the Government, we need to do more to reinforce the social unacceptability and dangers of drink-driving to young people, particularly those who are newly qualified drivers?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to review business rates. (S4O-01246)

In that review, what does the minister intend to do with the small business bonus scheme, which has been extremely popular with small businesses and from which many of them have derived significant benefits? Does he foresee the scheme having a key role going forward?

They are the experts in that.

I welcome the debate, which is timely. As the minister indicated, holding the debate before the end of the consultation allows us to put views into the consultation and to promote it to wider Scottish society. I will highlight a number of examples from the north-east that demonstrate best practice and indicate the kind of projects that could be realised and strengthened as a result of this process. The first example harks back to my maiden speech in this chamber, in which I highlighted the work of the Udny community wind turbine. It was established as a result of the community council deciding that it wanted to develop a local wind turbine and fund local projects with the money that was generated from selling the electricity to the national grid. The council projected that, over a 20 year period, as much as £4 million to £5 million could be raised for that small community, which comprises only a couple of villages in Aberdeenshire. I had the pleasure of visiting the turbine after it had been officially switched on. The Udny community wind turbine went on to be awarded the community initiative award at last year’s Scottish green energy awards. It is a fantastic example of the kind of community renewable initiative to which the minister referred in his opening speech and it sets a strong example of what can be achieved by communities coming together, recognising a strong project and working to deliver it. Those things could be strengthened by some aspects that could be introduced to the bill. I also want to touch on leased community centres. In Aberdeen, where I had the pleasure of serving as a local councillor, a number of community centres are already leased and more will become leased. I want to highlight the Inchgarth community centre, which I have experience of from my time working for Maureen Watt and from standing for election to another Parliament as a candidate for Aberdeen South. Inchgarth is a leased community centre that is run by and for the community, and it is popular and vibrant. A tea room has recently been added to it, which is doing a roaring trade. One of the centre’s volunteers, 17-year-old Ruairidh Morrison, was recently awarded the young volunteer award at the Aberdeen impact awards, which are run by the Aberdeen Council for Voluntary Organisations. The centre’s chairman, Paul O’Connor, was recently awarded an MBE for his work in the community. The centre runs a range of different classes and projects that are tailored to deliver on the community’s behalf and which are proving extremely popular. In such operations, communities can take ownership of the programme and what is delivered. Communities are often much more aware of what the community is looking for than council officials are, in terms of the programme that they would deliver. Margo MacDonald rose— I see that Margo MacDonald wishes to intervene. I will happily let her.

It began very much with a group of committed individuals who used the centre and saw the potential to do more with it. That also happened at the Powis gateway community centre in Aberdeen, where the management committee, which had been advising council officials, was encouraged to take over the running of the centre and is delivering a much more vibrant and fulfilling programme for the community than the council was delivering. It is about using local knowledge and drive, but often it is important that volunteers are in place from the beginning. The issue is how we ensure that people are involved or willing to get involved in their communities. I think that Margo MacDonald’s point, which I take, was about capacity building. Councils need to build capacity in communities. The one note of caution that I strike in relation to the leased community centres is that Aberdeen City Council has sent letters to centres that suggest that if they do not sign up to new lease agreements, which are currently being negotiated, they will be evicted by the end of November. It is unfortunate that the council sent such letters before the negotiation process reached its natural conclusion. There is an extremely good community garden in Dyce—the village where I live and which I represented on the local council. One of my unfinished projects when I was a councillor—it was unfinished because I was elected to the Parliament—was to develop a community garden in Bucksburn. I am still keen to drive forward the project, which will bring together the community, the council and other interested stakeholders. In Dyce, the community council received a generous grant to upgrade the path network in Central park, and was fortunate enough to have money left over from the project, which it sought to spend wisely. It spotted a play area that had fallen into significant disrepair, and by using the talents of its members and the community planning officer, and after seeking the community’s views, it was able to develop the play area so that what had been fairly ramshackle and disused is now probably extremely vibrant and well used. As that example demonstrates, councils sometimes hold assets that they do not regard as a priority for upgrading, because of budgetary constraints and so on, which local communities can develop if they are given the opportunity and the resources to do so. I hope that the minister will take such examples on board. I will be happy to share more information with him if he wants me to do so, to inform how he shapes the bill. There are good examples of how the bill can work, and I will be excited to see how the bill develops, because it has exciting potential for Scotland’s communities.

I do not wish to interrupt Mr Macintosh’s television review, but does he nonetheless accept that delivering record amounts of social housing, as the Scottish Government is doing, somewhat flies in the face of his rhetoric, given the paltry numbers that were delivered by the Government of which he was a supporter?

I was interested to hear the exchange between my colleague Jean Urquhart and Ken Macintosh on the CBI and its role in shaping the debate. I was fortunate—if that is the right adjective—to attend the CBI dinner last week and listen to the lecture by Mr Osborne. I also listened to the director general of the CBI, John Cridland, who gave his views on independence and where it would put us. It would perhaps have been better if he had done a bit more research into how the Scottish Parliament operates, because one of the areas in which he said there are no new national boundaries was climate change, despite the fact that this Parliament has passed world-leading climate change legislation. With regard to the austerity agenda, it is becoming increasingly clear that—to paraphrase the old Saatchi & Saatchi poster—austerity isn’t working.

No thank you, Mr Macintosh. Numerous economists have been quoted in the recent past. Just last week, Professor James Mirrlees, Professor David Blanchflower—a former member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee—Professor Andrew Hughes Hallett and Professor Drew Scott were talking about the downturn being “shorter and shallower in Scotland than in the UK as a whole” and talking about the need for spending on infrastructure and “having the courage to admit the need for change when it is so desperately required”. Professor Joseph Stiglitz said recently: “No large economy has ever recovered from a downturn as a result of austerity. It is a certain recipe for exacerbating the recession and inflicting unnecessary pain on the economy”. The Nobel-prize winning economist Paul Krugman from Princeton University said recently: “This is a time for the UK government to be borrowing and spending.” The difficulty that those quotations present is the failure of the Conservatives to recognise and understand the concept of using sustainable borrowing wisely to stimulate economic growth. Murdo Fraser implied in his intervention during the cabinet secretary’s speech that borrowing in and of itself is bad. That is not the case at all. We cannot simply continue with the notion that to borrow money will in and of itself lead to economic difficulty. It depends on how we use that borrowing and how we activate the levers of borrowing to stimulate economic growth. If borrowing is used wisely to create demand and jobs within the economy and to increase the global tax take, that is sustainable growth and sustainable use of borrowing. Although the UK Government is indeed borrowing more than it was previously, no emphasis is being placed on the sustainable borrowing and investment in infrastructure projects that would lead to that outcome. It is a question of powers. It is a facetious notion to suggest that somehow we can operate in a situation where we have 30 per cent cuts to our capital budget and no borrowing powers, yet we can spend more money than we are currently spending. It is always going to be a case of money being moved around within a diminishing resource at the behest of a Government from afar over which we have no direct control. I do not aspire to that situation. I aspire to this Parliament being more than a mere pocket-money Parliament. I want this to be a Parliament that is able to administer and generate the revenues that would allow us to drive Scotland forward—a Parliament that is able to borrow money in a sustainable fashion in order to deliver some of the shovel-ready projects that would stimulate demand in the economy, increase the number of jobs available and get Scotland’s economy moving much more quickly than it is currently because of the policies that are being implemented south of the border.

Mr Macintosh simplifies the argument somewhat, as is his wont. The simple point is that we are given a fixed resource to work with. There is opportunity within that resource for us to move money around and change our priorities. That is why, for example, if we look at the comparative reductions that there have been, we see that college budgets have been protected more here than they have been south of the border. It is a simple fact of life that, in a reducing fixed budget, we will have to make cuts. If Mr Macintosh seriously wants us to be in the position of not simply passing on cuts, he has to give us a credible explanation of how that could be delivered within the current powers and the current fixed budget. He has talked repeatedly—he did so last week—about wanting to spend more money in the housing budget. That is fine, but at the same time he has to tell us where he would make a reduction in the Government’s budget in order to finance that. One reason why we can afford—

No, I will expand on that point.

More is the pity. The point on the housing budget is that money can be levered in from elsewhere. For example, work is being done to develop pension fund investment into housing. That does not rely on direct funding from the Government, but it still allows us to sustain investment in housing. It is a question of looking at areas where such creative approaches can be taken rather than simply, as Mr Macintosh would do, throwing up one’s hands and saying that money is going down and nothing can be done. Scotland is an attractive place for inward investment, as demonstrated by the Ernst and Young survey. Lloyds TSB stated to the Finance Committee that it did not see the referendum as a detriment; rather, it saw it as a positive for businesses looking to invest in Scotland. On the other hand, we are faced with empty scaremongering from the unionist parties. It would be better if they spent more time talking up the economy of Scotland rather than talking it down.

Does the member therefore agree that an immigration policy that is not tailored to that agenda might hold the economy back, and that it would be better if we were able to develop Scottish solutions?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Does Ms Milne agree that it is entirely hypocritical of those who refuse to move on after the referendum result now to suggest that everybody else should move on after this anti-democratic decision?

Let us deal with some of the myths that are going around. First, Crawford Langley oversaw the referendum, and his reputation is beyond question when it comes to overseeing elections and voting processes. He had no qualms about the fairness of the outcome of the referendum. Furthermore, the question that was put was worded by the friends of Union Terrace gardens—a campaign group that opposed the city garden project. That is the wording that the city council chose. Mike Shepherd of the friends of Union Terrace gardens stated at the council meeting following a referendum that, if the result had gone the way he wanted it to, he would have accepted it. Therefore, it is not that the referendum process was flawed, merely that the result was not what those who campaigned against the project wanted, so they sought to undermine the process of the referendum. It is clear that the people expressed their will in the referendum, but Labour has imposed its will on the people of Aberdeen. That is the difference. The scheme that was put forward at the council meeting was not one that had featured in the manifesto of anybody who stood for election, and it had no basis of public support. One of the key tests that the Government stated that it wanted to see achieved during the TIF pilot process was public support, which was achieved by the referendum. I was a convert to the project. It took time for me to consider the design and its potential, but once I had seen the design that Aberdeen City Gardens Trust brought forward I was a convert to it.

The granite web. That is clearly what I was talking about. I would have respected the result of the referendum whichever way it had gone. If the majority had been in favour of the retention of Union Terrace gardens, I would have respected that, but it did not go that way. Those who are now choosing to impose their will should reflect on that. I was interested to hear Richard Baker’s remarks about how the decision is about Labour keeping manifesto pledges and commitments because, in the papers recently, Labour has been keen on pushing the notion of the pedestrianisation of Union Street. I found a leaflet from the council elections that was put out in the Torry/Ferryhill ward by Yvonne Allan, who is now a councillor and deputy convener of the finance committee, and Kathryn Russell, who was the unsuccessful candidate. It states: “Kathryn says, ‘The pedestrianisation of Union Street would increase traffic congestion in Ferryhill. Yvonne and I would oppose such proposals.’” Prior to the election, there was opposition to the pedestrianisation of Union Street, but now, with Labour in power, it is proposed. I do not have a problem if people recognise that the facts and circumstances surrounding a project have changed, but the facts surrounding the city garden project did not change. The people supported it, and it was up to the Labour Party to be grown-up enough to accept that result. Let us look at the issue of TIF funding. Labour put up several straw men during the evolution of the city garden project. First, it attacked the general concept of what was proposed, despite the fact that, as my colleague Brian Adam so eloquently described, it had been proposed by Labour councillors in the past. Indeed, Len Ironside, who is convener of social work on the council, proposed a millennium square during his time as council leader, which would have had a similar effect of covering over the Denburn and raising Union Terrace gardens to street level. Labour then attacked the aesthetics by talking about the design and how unattractive it was. Both of those arguments were resoundingly defeated by the referendum result, so Labour moved them to the side and started to attack the funding model. That is where it put most of its ammunition between the referendum result and the decision in August. Labour is now saying that we should give the council TIF, which it attacked so vehemently, for as yet unspecified, uncosted projects. Labour cannot have it both ways. It has killed the goose that laid the golden egg by rejecting the project. That will be Labour’s legacy, and it will be to its eternal shame.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Third time lucky. If the member considers that the scheme will be so damaging, why are her colleagues south of the border continuing with a less generous scheme in England?

The American satirist Stephen Colbert once said of President George W Bush that he was a man who believed the same thing on Wednesday as he did on Monday, irrespective of what had happened on the Tuesday. When we listen to the speeches from the Opposition parties on this legislation, that maxim seems to apply. The legislation is a very different beast from that which appeared, along with its financial memorandum, before the Finance Committee. The minister has—as he has made quite clear today—been in listening mode throughout that period. In the past two days, Opposition members have stood up in the chamber during the announcement of the legislative programme and told us that the Government does not listen but simply uses its majority to steamroller things through. However, the minister has come to the chamber today and told Parliament that he has been listening to stakeholders and that he is open to listening to constructive suggestions. I was interested to hear Sarah Boyack’s contribution. From what I could gather, she was simultaneously arguing against the measures to achieve savings via the non-domestic rates proposals that the legislation contains while suggesting that Government should increase funding for things such as the HAG. She simply cannot argue for the Government to spend more money without indicating where that money would come from. We had the same discussion yesterday afternoon with her colleague, Ken Macintosh. It was suggested that perhaps Mr Macintosh had found a magical money tree in East Renfrewshire and that he could take us there.

Perhaps Mr Macintosh has revealed the tree to Sarah Boyack and told her where it is. Perhaps she will take the opportunity now to tell us the location of the tree that the Government could harvest to spend on the priorities on which Labour wants to spend more money.

It is interesting that whenever Labour members are challenged on their wish to spend more money, they say, “It is not us; it is other people who are asking to spend more money. We are simply bringing those points to the chamber.” They are de facto arguing for more money to be spent in certain areas while giving no indication of where they would make reductions in order to meet the consequential increase in funding. That is not constructive opposition. I say to Margaret Mitchell that Conservative members are the last people from whom I will take any lectures on housing issues. If the Tories had their way, they would have carried on selling off council homes and squeezing low-income families out of the housing market and out of the possibility of accessing social housing. If we look at the lists, we see that 9,500 households in Falkirk and 8,000 households in Aberdeen are waiting for a council home. Some 6,297 households are classed as homeless in Glasgow, and 16,714 households in Fife are waiting for a council home. That is the legacy of Thatcherism and shows what the Conservatives would do with council and social housing in Scotland. It is fantastic that we are able to protect Scottish social housing from the Conservatives. If only we could protect other areas of Scotland from them.

Margaret Mitchell made me wait, so I will make her wait slightly longer before she gets to intervene in my speech. There are claims that we are looking to England—at what the Labour Party implemented and the Tories are continuing—and simply copying it. That is simply not true. The measures that have been put forward are an improvement on the measures that are being implemented down south. The Scottish Government has looked at the lessons that were learned from down south and excluded industrial units, for example, because of the impact that the measures there had on them. We will continue to offer the most generous relief package in the United Kingdom because we have looked at examples from elsewhere and considered refinements and improvements.

I freely admit that I have not read that report, but organisations that came before the committee with their concerns gave evidence that industrial properties were the big question. We are told that the Tory UK Government does not think that the idea is good and that it does not want to continue with it. Margaret Mitchell’s perspective is interesting. Robert Neill, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government—at least he was when I found the quotation; I do not know what happened to him in the reshuffle—has stated that the coalition “have no immediate plans to reverse the reforms”.—[Official Report, House of Commons, 13 December 2010; Vol 520, c 62WS.] Therefore, the Tory Government is continuing with the policy south of the border. I am pleased that the minister responded constructively to my suggestion that he look to the Northern Ireland incentive package. There, relief is given at the point of a property being filled. It is important that there is some form of incentivisation in the package, and I am pleased that the minister has taken that on board and is proactively looking to see whether that can be incorporated at stage 2. I will be interested to see that coming forward. I hope that it will form part of the Government’s amendment package at stage 2. It is interesting what happens when one tries to be constructive and to offer alternative proposals. Perhaps Opposition members might wish to reflect on that, as we have heard scant little from them about how they would see the bill being reformed or made to work better. We heard Anne McTaggart telling us that she believes that the bill is “salvageable”, but she has not told us what she sees as the key changes that need to be made. She told us what her concerns are—I understand that—but she has not told us what changes need to be made in order to satisfy her concerns, and she needs to do that in order that the minister can take them on board. I look forward to the amendments that Labour members lodge at stage 2. Some Opposition members have moaned that life was better in the previous session because, apparently, the Government listened more. We have a minister who has stated clearly that he is listening. It is up to the Opposition parties to start to say things that are occasionally constructive and worth listening to.

Will the member give way?

I aspire only to extract the truth from Mr Hume. If the UK Government views the measure simply as revenue raising by the Labour Government, will he explain why it has reduced the threshold of rateable value at which exemptions kick in?

Will Mr Johnstone take an intervention?

Alex Johnstone talked about the buy-to-let market. Looking at the issue on a discretionary, council-by-council basis, does the minister agree that there are some areas where rents in the buy-to-let market are still far too high and discourage people to take up those properties, and that the measures might encourage more affordable rents rather than the aspirational rents that are often set?

Over the summer, I wrote to Mr Baker to ask whether, as Labour’s capital investment spokesperson, he would back the Scottish Government’s calls for the UK Government to bring forward shovel-ready projects. To date I have received no reply. Perhaps he would like to give me the answer now.

Drew Smith’s comment kind of made the point that I will make. The better together contributions to the debate have been a combination of the ad hoc, the ad hom and the ad nauseam. That was started yesterday by Johann Lamont’s lamentable lament, which set the tone for today’s debate. Richard Baker told me not to be upset. I say to him that the only thing that was upset was my digestion while I listened to his speech. Apart from that, I am perfectly chipper, thanks very much, Mr Baker. There is much to be positive and ambitious about in the legislative programme. It is unfortunate that the better together parties are trying to criticise a substantial legislative agenda. For example, Johann Lamont rather pooh-poohed the better regulation bill when she suggested that nobody would look back and welcome it in 50 years’ time. That is a judgment call for her to make, but she is obviously not speaking to members of the business community, who have welcomed the bill and who I am sure will have raised their eyebrows at her contribution. I heard Patrick Harvie say that he hoped that the better regulation bill would not be simply a deregulation bill. It is important for the regulatory landscape to strike a balance—it must work for wider society and for business, to ensure that businesses are not inhibited unnecessarily. I am sure that the Government will bear that balance in mind as it introduces the bill. I will focus a little on capital expenditure. The Government must bring forward projects where it can. It is restricted in doing so by the cuts—of 30 per cent since 2009—that are being brought to bear on the capital budget. To lever in funding, we are forced to ask Westminster to release more funding, as we have no borrowing powers. I say to Mr Macintosh that saying to Westminster, “Please give us more money,” is not a choice that we make; it is the only game in town as long as the money that is available to us is restricted. In response to the reasonable intervention by my colleague Nigel Don, Mr Macintosh seemed to perform bizarre gymnastics of logic to say somehow that the limit of our ambition is to ask Westminster for more money. I am afraid that that is the limit of the ambition of the Labour Party, the Tories and the Liberal Democrats for this Parliament. If they have their way, that will continue to be the situation—the Parliament will continue to have to hold out its hands and say to Westminster, “Please, sir, I would like some more.” We want this Parliament and this nation to control their own destiny and to shape their own future by taking control of powers over capital expenditure and borrowing, of the levers of the economy and of welfare and pensions—things that matter greatly to the people whom Ken Macintosh and I represent and which are currently not in the Parliament’s competence.

We have made it clear that we believe in sustainable borrowing to stimulate the economy through, for example, investment in shovel-ready projects, which create more jobs and increase the income tax take, because more people are in employment. That is a simple economic argument, for which I believe that Mr Macintosh’s colleagues south of the border are arguing in a pan-UK context, so I do not understand why he has such difficulty with it in a Scottish context. I will describe the simple point that Mr Macintosh fails to realise and which Mr Don neatly nailed. As Labour Party members have stood up in the past day and a bit, I have listened carefully for suggestions of areas in which to reduce spending in order to increase spending for their pet projects and other areas in which they wish spending to be increased. I have yet to hear a single suggestion. That is simply not credible for an Opposition that aspires at some stage to be the Government again. It is Labour’s responsibility to present itself as a credible alternative and, in order to do that, it must demonstrate that it would be able to spend the money that is currently allocated to the Scottish Government in what it perceives to be a more suitable way.

I will in a second. Labour members cannot simply stand up and tell us to spend more money on colleges and housing without, as a consequence, telling us to spend less money on this or that. That is simply pulling the wool over the eyes of the Scottish people and assuming that there is some money hidden somewhere. Maybe there is a money tree in East Renfrewshire and Mr Macintosh could take us to it later so that we can harvest it and use it to pay for some of our priorities. I give way to Margo MacDonald.

I hear Tony Blair’s description of this place echoing in my head. The referendum ties all of this together. Only by gaining full control of the powers of our nation can we drive it forward to a better future, taking control of welfare, pensions, capital expenditure, foreign affairs and defence—things that matter fundamentally to the people whom we represent. We have demonstrated over the lifetime of this Parliament that we can run health and education—there is no reason why we cannot run those other things. That is why we need to be an independent Scotland.

It is interesting that Mr Kelly seems upset that the referendum bill is taking so long to introduce, given that his party has continually said that we should be focusing on government rather than the constitution. Surely that is a non-sequitur.

Lewis Macdonald omitted to mention that at the time of the TIF pilot scheme launch, the cabinet secretary announced that the Aberdeen TIF would be required to demonstrate public support in order to proceed. The city garden project demonstrated public support through the city-wide referendum, but the current hotch-potch, back-of-an-envelope proposal not only has been untested by referendum, but did not feature in a single manifesto at the recent local council elections. Does the cabinet secretary consider that the Labour-led administration’s alternative proposals have in any way met the public support test?

Perhaps Mr Rennie might like to take this opportunity to put on the record his apology to the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and civic society for his attempt to shut them out of the debate on Scotland’s future.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Yesterday, during the stage 3 debate on the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, Jenny Marra challenged me to audit Scotland’s 32 local authorities and stated that, if I did so, I would find that the Labour Party has “far more female councillors” than the SNP across the nation. I have done that, and I have discovered that Labour has 103 female councillors in Scotland while the SNP has 105.

I am sure that Ms Marra did not mean to mislead the chamber and that she will want to correct the record at the earliest available opportunity.

Will the member take an intervention?

It is already pressed.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Alex Johnstone talks about getting people into work. Most of my colleagues have covered the notion that the changes will affect not just people who are not in work, but even in relation to people who are not in work, perhaps he should consider talking to his Conservative colleagues in London and getting them to put capital investment into the shovel-ready projects that would help to stimulate the economy and create the jobs that are not available. To be frank, strangling our nation’s economic growth while widening the holes in the safety net into which people are expected to fall is nothing short of abhorrent. I direct Mr Johnstone to the comments of 17-year-old Dylan Munro in tonight’s Evening Express about the impact that the Cameron proposals on housing benefit for the under-25s would have on him. He has been through an employment programme at Station House Media Unit. He states clearly that if he lost his housing subsidy, which helps him as a minimum-wage earner, he would become homeless. That is not the kind of future to which we should aspire for young Scots such as Dylan Munro. The housing benefit changes in relation to occupancy will have a massive impact on local authorities and housing associations. As a Finance Committee member, I have heard evidence to that effect from local authorities and the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations. The changes fly in the face of housing policy, because they anticipate that we will somehow start throwing up one-bedroom properties again, when the drive must be to provide more family-sized accommodation. They also take no consideration of individuals who might be separated and who might require additional bedrooms for children who visit them at weekends or for other periods, for example. A ridiculous approach is being taken. We hear about the notion of £2.2 billion a year; would that we were not spending £3.5 billion a year on a Trident replacement—I am sure that the people of Scotland would be more than happy to see the back of that in order to help the most vulnerable. We in the Parliament are dealing with mitigation; that is all that we can do. At the Finance Committee’s meeting on Tuesday, John Swinney said that he could not say that he could protect everyone from the impacts of welfare reform. Given the Parliament’s fixed budget, it would be wrong of us to claim that we can protect everyone. Protecting everybody from the impacts of the welfare reform changes at Westminster simply will not be possible. If the route that David Cameron has described is followed, while the UK Government continues to attack this Parliament’s budgets, the situation will become even more difficult for us to deal with. It is not credible for anyone to look at the wrecking ball that is being taken to the welfare state and claim with any sincerity that a progressive, open and socially just future for Scotland is better served by remaining part of the UK. I heard talk about Scotland as an independent country being an uncertain future for our people. Frankly, I agree with Ian Bell of The Herald, who said clearly that the future is an uncertain place, but it is far more uncertain for our people as part of the United Kingdom than it is as an independent Scotland. Presiding Officer, the mace that sits in front of you is inscribed with the values that this Parliament and this nation hold true. One of those is compassion, and I see precious little compassion in the Con-Dem welfare reforms that are currently taking place or in those that are being mooted by David Cameron for the future. Scotland could and will do better for our most vulnerable.

Will the member take an intervention?

The cabinet secretary highlighted that he has remained within the budget exchange limits. Does he agree, however, that it is ridiculous that the Treasury is able to cap the exchange mechanism and that, if the Parliament had full financial responsibility, we would be able to deliver the full range of shovel-ready projects now, rather than waiting for George Osborne’s next U-turn?

Does Jenny Marra accept that if the political will existed, what she seeks could be achieved? For example, in Aberdeen, the SNP appointed a 50:50 gender split to the police and fire boards, but the Labour Party appointed a 100 per cent male board. [Interruption.]

I congratulate Nanette Milne on bringing this important debate to the chamber. I know that her original intention was to have a members’ business debate on the motion, but the seriousness of the issue is such that it is appropriate that it has been chosen for Conservative Party business. I am pleased, given that there appears to be consensus, that we are able to unite around the motion and amendments. I met Sheila McKay of the Grampian Family Support Forum not long after I was elected, at the community partnerships programme event that was held in the Parliament. As Nanette Milne did, I attended the recovery happens event in the Parliament. It is fair to say that one would need to have had a heart of stone not to be moved by the testimonies of the individuals who spoke at that meeting. The clear message came out that families have a key role and that they want it to be further embedded. There were three main messages from the event. First, families have a lot to contribute and want to be involved in supporting the people whom they love, and in helping to find solutions to the wider problems. Secondly, people who are recovering from addiction want to give something back. Thirdly, we as a Parliament and as a society, need to work together to help to tackle the stigma that people with addictions and their families face. Important work is being done by networks such as the Grampian Family Support Forum and the other forums that have been mentioned and which will, I am sure, continue to be mentioned by members. The key role that they play is to ensure that families that are affected by substance misuse do not feel isolated within their communities. One thing that was highlighted at the recovery happens event—Nanette Milne mentioned it in her speech—is that, whether we like it or not, a societal stigma remains around substance misuse, and especially around families in which a member has a substance misuse problem. Stigma is felt by those families when, instead of taking what might be seen as the easy option and casting the family member away, they choose to support and help them. As Nanette Milne said, one aspect of that stigma is the language that is used in society. At the recovery happens event, I made the point that we politicians have a key role to play in shaping the public debate about substance misuse and how individuals and families who are affected by it are viewed through the prism of the public debate. We must all take caution and reflect on how we respond to calls from journalists to comment on issues relating to substance misuse, particularly where an individual has committed an offence that relates to their substance misuse. The language that is used often stigmatises the family of the individual, which adds to the isolation that they feel—isolation that is being tackled by groups such as the Grampian Family Support Forum. We also need to reflect on our own situations, which I certainly did during the recovery happens event. Within my community, my peer group and the people I went to school with, there are those who have gone down the road of substance misuse, and I reflected on the different ways in which our lives have gone. Some of the people whom I played with in the playground at primary school now find themselves involved in substance misuse. We must recognise that substance misuse is not the preserve of certain communities in society. It happens to people who have the same life chances as those who go on to very different outcomes and destinations. It can happen to anyone, and it can affect anyone. We need to reflect on that when we look at how we shape the debate going forward.

How I yearn for the days when the Labour Party and the Liberal Democrats had a functioning majority in the Parliament. They used to listen to Parliament at every opportunity and never, ever used their majority to just nod things through or to ignore criticism or suggestions from the Opposition. Selective rewriting of history has just taken another bold step forward, although not quite as bold a step as the Conservatives appear to have taken. It is always good to hear Conservatives advocating U-turns on budgets, as they have made that something of an art form at Westminster of late. Whether on pasties, grannies, caravans, regional pay or the oil and gas exploration tax, you name it, the Conservative Party announces it in a rush and then U-turns the moment it realises that it has bungled. The Conservatives talk about proposals not being in manifestos and damage to business, but it was the Conservative Party that hiked VAT to 20 per cent, a measure that I do not recall seeing in the Conservative Party manifesto and which has caused damage to businesses the length and breadth of Scotland. Frankly, if there is a prize in this Parliament for a brass neck, Gavin Brown has certainly earned it—and then some—today. Sarah Boyack referred to the Finance Committee, of which I am a member. Her comment that the committee’s report on the bill is damning does not reflect the constructive approach that committee members took, with notable exceptions. The Government and the bill team have made it clear throughout that the approach is not set in stone and that they are willing to engage with stakeholders throughout the process. Marianne Cook from the bill team said in evidence that ministers had indicated that they will be “flexible” over the reform and will listen to stakeholders, including those from the business community. The minister has said that he is listening, but the Opposition parties have not made a lot of constructive alternative suggestions.

Gavin Brown or his colleagues can deal with that point later. He will not impinge on my time, when he had 10 minutes to talk about that earlier. At present, the cost of empty property relief over a five-year period is £0.75 billion. When that figure is highlighted to people in my area, they question whether the money is being used appropriately. As for the claim that properties are being demolished, it rather contradicts the point about people wanting to let or sell them. It also suggests that the buildings in question are brand spanking new business centres; I know that individuals in my region are sitting on a number of properties in a significant state of disrepair simply because they are receiving rates relief. As the minister is seeking constructive suggestions, I will offer him one. At the moment, Northern Ireland is looking to offer 50 per cent relief to businesses that occupy long-term empty properties. Perhaps the minister and the Government could consider that constructive proposal as a further incentive to let these properties.

Doctors pay taxes; it is Tory donors who do not.

16. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding the advertising of follow-on milk. (S4O-01174)

The minister will be aware that the World Health Organization’s “International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes” recommends that there should be no commercial promotion of alternatives to breast milk. In Norway, where there is no such commercial promotion, 99 per cent of babies are breastfed at birth and more than 90 per cent are still breastfed at the age of four months. There is a feeling that allowing the promotion of follow-on milk clouds the judgment of mothers who may otherwise breastfeed their child and leads them to choose formula instead. Will the minister take that on board and meet me to discuss these matters further?

I congratulate my colleague, Jamie Hepburn, on securing this extremely important debate. Like Jamie Hepburn, I wear the hat of a parent when I speak in the chamber and I commend the courage shown by David Grimason and Mick North in channelling their grief positively. It is a testament to the strength of both men. We should also note the work that is being done by the control arms campaign, which was nominated for a Nobel peace prize this year, and the work that it has done to bring together a range of organisations to campaign for much more stringent controls on the arms trade. As the situation stands, the problem is that regulation is essentially the responsibility of individual states. Therein lies a conflict. The aggressive lobbying of arms companies often leads countries into a conflict situation. There are nations out there that have questionable foreign and domestic policies, and we cannot necessarily rely on those nations always to act in the best possible way in relation to the arms trade. I am keen to see an arms trade treaty because I would like to see the prevention of human rights abuses. We have discussed how the countries that were involved in the Arab spring saw the state using weapons against peaceful protesters. Under an arms trade treaty, such states would not be able to import arms and other nations would not be able to continue to trade arms with them, as Russia does with Syria. There is no indication that Russia has changed its policy on the arms trade treaty and, indeed, it is one of the nations that is backing it, but Russia would be in breach of such a treaty if it continued to supply Syria with weapons, as it is doing. Embargoes are ineffective. Oxfam has estimated that £2.2 billion of arms were imported by countries that were under embargoes. As countries are necessarily forewarned of an embargo, one often sees a spike in arms trading in advance of an embargo coming into force, as happened in Côte d’Ivoire, for example. Embargoes are also ambiguous. Huge loopholes give arms dealers the opportunity to claim that they are unaware of the fact that the nations with which they are trading will use those weapons against their civilian population, as is the case in Syria and was the case in Libya, despite the fact that there is plenty of documented evidence to suggest the contrary. A key consideration for companies and countries is that they will have to start to think in the long term when it comes to the trading of arms. They need to think about who they are trading with and where those arms might end up. They need to think about the security situation of their trading partner and who else their trading partner does business with. The arms trade treaty is an important treaty that needs to be passed. I congratulate my colleague Jamie Hepburn on bringing the subject to the chamber. It is important that members of the Scottish Parliament have the opportunity to put our views on the record. I look forward to the treaty being passed and to a much better way of dealing with the international arms trade.

Will the member take an intervention?

I freely admit to not being a legal expert, but my understanding is that the bill is about eligibility for parole, and not about automatic early release. I am unsure where Margaret Mitchell’s train of thought is taking her, but I suspect that it is in the wrong direction.

I spoke in the stage 1 debate on the bill and I am pleased to have been given the opportunity to speak in the stage 3 debate. It appears that the bill will be passed this evening, given the comments that Opposition members have made. At stage 1, I said in response to comments that David McLetchie made, which Jenny Marra raised, that the litmus test of any legislation is not that it makes easy bedtime reading, but that it delivers outcomes that can be seen to deliver benefits. That litmus test has been applied, and it has been passed in parts 1 and 2 of the bill. Jenny Marra spoke about the need to make legislation more accessible to the public and the possibility that the legislation’s complexity might make it unintelligible to victims and witnesses who are involved in the legislative process. It will not have escaped members’ attention that, only last week, we discussed issues relating to victims and witnesses with a view to the Government’s proposed legislation on enhancing and improving support for victims and witnesses. I spoke in that debate and mentioned the pilot that Victim Support Scotland is running in the Tayside area. I think that there are pilots in a couple of other regions as well, but Tayside is, obviously, in North East Scotland, which I represent. In that pilot, “Victims and witnesses will be supported through, and gain speedier access to, case progress information”. The aim is also to ensure that information is given to them “in an understandable way.” We should not necessarily believe that victims and witnesses must be able to read and understand legislation themselves; there is often a need for organisations such as Victim Support Scotland to offer such support to them. I think that the issue of how the Government can ensure that victims and witnesses have the support to be able to understand the complexities of the legislative process will be on the Government’s radar as matters progress. We recognise that the process is often complex for members of the public.

I welcome the member’s clarification. I think that we would all agree with that; indeed, that was the notion around which I framed my remarks during last week’s debate. I turn to a point that was made by Margaret Mitchell and the introduction into the debate of automatic early release. That issue was surprisingly absent at stage 1, given how important it apparently is to understanding the reasons behind Petch and Foye. It was absent in the discussions at stage 1 because it is not relevant: the issue is comparative justice. Whether an offender is serving a full determinate sentence or is released early from a determinate sentence is irrelevant. The relevant issue is the need to strip out the element of public protection that gave rise to the anomaly that the Government has dealt with in the legislation.

I understand entirely that Margaret Mitchell may think that I have misunderstood the complexities of the legislation, but I contend that perhaps she has misunderstood those complexities and has mistakenly brought automatic early release into the debate. She will have an opportunity to clarify and reflect on that in summing up, but I suggest to her that automatic early release is a red herring in the debate and ought not to have been brought into consideration at this stage.

I give Margaret Mitchell the opportunity to clarify and perhaps withdraw her comments.

We are talking about eligibility for parole, which in my understanding is not the same as automatic early release. Although only a small number of cases are affected by the issue that was raised in Petch and Foye, we should not lose sight of the fact that those cases relate to significant and serious crimes, hence the application of a non-mandatory life sentence. That is why it is extremely important to introduce legislation at this stage, rather than to examine some of the wider sentencing issues that Mary Fee raised in her speech. It is important that we close that loophole now, on the basis that it relates to extremely serious crimes and to the need to ensure that the public are appropriately protected from those individuals. With regard to addressing anomalies, part 2 has been described as largely redundant. That would be a fair assumption if we were to assume that it related only to the al-Megrahi case, but—as has been mentioned—the general framing of the bill means that it can be applied in future cases. Whether such cases arise is neither here nor there: the fact that they are now provided for is the important thing. It is better that we have those provisions and perhaps do not need them in future than that we might need them and do not have them on the statute book. That is why it is important that we pass the bill, regardless of whether part 2 is seen by some as irrelevant, which is not necessarily the case. I look forward to the bill being passed.

Although modern apprenticeships are a key part of the Government’s programme, we risk losing focus on the fact that the issue is wider than simply modern apprenticeships. If we do not recognise that, we lose sight of the bigger picture. We must not get into quasi-Orwellian language in referring to modern apprenticeships as if some are more valuable than others. All apprenticeships have value, so to use terms such as “making modern apprenticeships meaningful”, which, by extension of logic, implies that some, or all, are meaningless, is unhelpful and not to the credit of the members who made those remarks, although the implication may have been unintentional.

No, thank you. I have less than six minutes and I have a few points that I want to make. The Finance Committee has been taking evidence on employability. We were grateful to the minister for coming before the committee yesterday in its final evidence session. I raised a number of points during that session, although some would say that it was more banging a drum than raising a point. I want to put on record some of my thoughts on the work that might be done on the subjects of stigmatisation and role models. An area that I have been keen to explore—it was raised by Who Cares? Scotland at the Finance Committee—is looked-after children, and how we deal with people who are leaving care, given the current economic situation in which job opportunities are not always available. For whatever reason, a stigma is attached to people who have left a care setting when they apply for a job, particularly if they are up against four or five individuals who do not have that background. We must do all that we can to break that stigma. One way to do that is to have local authorities using their corporate parenting role positively. As parents, we aspire to give our children the best opportunities and, if we operated a family firm, we would try to find opportunities in that firm for our children, if possible. Local authorities should consider this from a corporate parenting perspective. I commend the work that has been done by Aberdeen City Council in offering work experience placements to looked-after children within the council organisation, and I hope that other local authorities might consider doing likewise. Beyond that, we need to consider whether there are opportunities to use role models—people who have left a care setting and are in the world of work. They do not have to be high fliers but can be people who hold down a steady job and who can share their experiences and act as mentors and role models, if they wish to do so. That is something that we also need to look at positively. Another area of stigmatisation is the mentality that we have had for too long in Scotland that certain jobs are undesirable. They become categorised as those jobs that people will end up doing if they do not stick in at school. We need to break that cycle and stigma, and use positive role models to do that. At one of the Finance Committee meetings, representatives of Asda told us that their chief executive started in the company as a shelf stacker with one O level. That is the kind of person we need to have operating as a positive role model to show people that, although they should aspire to leave school with academic qualifications, it should not be seen as the end of the world if they do not achieve that outcome. The minister spoke about the stigmatisation of young people in the difficult views that businesses sometimes have. That came across in the written evidence to the committee from GTG Training, and it was disappointing that it was not able to attend the committee to be questioned about the evidence that it gave about the employability of young people. When businesses identify young people they feel are not ready for employment, they absolutely must signpost them to where they can receive training and support to make them more employable. If they do not do that, those young people will just become caught in some kind of ridiculous merry-go-round or pass-the-parcel from employer to employer. They might not be able to access the workforce but neither can they access the assistance that is required to give them the necessary skills to get them into the workforce. The minister spoke about meaningful work experience and engagement with employers. I commend the work that is being done by the schools careers industry partnership in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. An article appeared on the STV Aberdeen website yesterday that said that hundreds of youngsters are set to benefit from a training programme that will help school leavers to find work. The scheme is partially funded by local authorities and through sponsorship from the oil and gas and subsea sectors. It seeks to provide young people with skills, training and assistance to get the skills that they will require to enter the world of work when they leave school. Alastair Fraser, the director of Coaching Training Consultancy, said of GTG Training: “Essentially they were saying that youngsters aren’t used to work or fit to work. Our experience in working with more than 800 young people is that they need help and support to sell themselves well.” The work that is being done by the schools careers industry partnership in the north-east should be looked at and replicated elsewhere. We owe it to ourselves to help our young people in every way possible.

On Annabel Goldie’s comment, my understanding of “Strike it Lucky” is that participants had to avoid hitting hot spots. The Scottish Government, in introducing the bill, has recognised that although a great distance has been travelled in relation to the role of victims and witnesses and how the justice system operates in relation to them, the journey is not yet complete and there is still work to be done. I was interested by an article that was recently published in The Guardian, which commented on an Institute of Public Policy Research report that suggested that “Police forces should develop crime-tracking applications” to allow individuals to “follow their cases through the system”. Furthermore, “The IPPR found that not knowing about what was happening in a case was a key cause of frustration for victims and undermined their confidence in the criminal justice system.” I was struck by how that perhaps complements some of the work that is being done by Victim Support Scotland on case-progress information. It has developed a pilot in Tayside in which “Victims and witnesses of crime will be supported through, and gain speedier access to, case progress information in an understandable way.” Those two issues seem to me to be matched quite closely together, so I am interested to hear the Government’s view on that and how the suggestion in the IPPR report might be progressed. Lewis Macdonald spoke about Peter Morris—I want to focus on that subject for the remainder of my speech. I encountered Mr Morris in the north-east of Scotland, and I was struck by some his testimony as a witness and, by extension, as a victim of the process. I note that one of the Government’s proposed key principles is that “Victims and witnesses should have access to appropriately tailored support before, during and after proceedings.” I want to focus much of what I have to say on that because it relates to the matter that Mr Morris was obviously campaigning on. As Lewis Macdonald rightly highlighted, Mr Morris’s sister Claire was murdered in 1994, although the trial was not brought until some 17 years later when new evidence came to light. I first encountered Mr Morris was when he was trying to reclaim his sister’s grave, and it is worth putting on record the excellent work of the Aberdeen Law Project, which is a student-led clinic that did a huge amount of work to assist Mr Morris in that endeavour. Mr Morris petitioned the Parliament on victims of crime. His view was very much that, although the perpetrators of crime are delivered sentences, there is also often a silent sentence that is served on those who are the victims of crime and, by extension, on their families. Mr Morris undertook a walk to Parliament, which unfortunately had a personal cost for him because he was forced to have one of his legs amputated below the knee after it became infected. However, I walked the first 10 miles of that walk with Mr Morris from his sister’s graveside to the village of Newburgh in Aberdeenshire. On the way, we discussed the issues that he was trying to raise. One of the things that he felt was difficult was that there can be gaps in support for victims because of compartmentalisation of the justice process, in that each component of the justice system has its own role. Victims often feel, therefore, that they are being passed like a parcel from organisation to organisation as each organisation’s role closes and another’s begins.

I will finish my point, first. One of the difficulties is that gaps emerge and individuals often fall into them. One of the key things that we need to do is find out where the gaps are and decide how best to close them to ensure that victims do not fall into them.

Hanzala Malik has made an excellent point and I am sure that the Government will be acutely aware of the need for appropriate support to be given to victims whose first language is not English and who may not be fluent in English, so that they can be helped throughout the process. Peter Morris petitioned Parliament on the suggestion of having case companions. I believe that the suggestion has merit, but unfortunately it was not received favourably by the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland. I worry that that response may be driven to some extent by the attitude to which the cabinet secretary alluded in his opening remarks: people sometimes fall into the trap of thinking that because things have been done in a particular way for so long, that is how they should be done, so they perhaps become averse to change. However, I believe that the case companion idea merits consideration. The article in The Guardian that I referred to earlier said: “The IPPR also said criminal justice agencies should automatically refer victims to online support networks, or agencies such as Victim Support should set up forums.” I believe that to ensure that victims and witnesses make a successful transition to support, there needs to be better signposting. Organisations need to work more closely—hand-in-hand—if the idea of having a single point of contact is not taken forward. We must ensure that victims and witnesses have appropriate signposting and that organisations do not necessarily think that their role in the process is finished.

I am afraid that I am already over my six minutes. I will get into trouble if I take an intervention.

In that case, I will take Mr Macdonald’s intervention.

I am aware that Dave Stewart raised that issue previously in Parliament, but it is not a subject with which I am overly familiar. However, I am one of the people who do not believe in dismissing ideas at the outset; we should consider suggestions at every possible opportunity. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will take on board constructive suggestions along the lines outlined and at least give them some scrutiny to see whether they would be workable within the system that he is looking to set up. I think that I may have exhausted the Presiding Officer’s generosity. I hope that my comments and suggestions have been constructive. I will leave it for others to make their own suggestions.

This debate focuses on a vital issue for many of the communities in North East Scotland, which I represent. If members travel up the north-east coast, which I greatly encourage them to do, they will pass through many of the traditional fishing communities of the north-east, from the larger ports such as Aberdeen, which retains much of the processing sector but few of the landings, Peterhead and Fraserburgh, to the smaller villages that had vibrant fishing ports, such as Johnshaven in the Mearns. Many of those communities bear the all-too-visible scars of previous CFP negotiations and their outcomes, most of which resulted in Scotland emerging as the loser. At least when we lose in Europe in football, the failure is usually glorious. Nevertheless, it need not be that way. It is clear that Scotland, via the cabinet secretary, is leading the charge for CFP reform. It is clear to all that he must be listened to on this, not just by the UK Government, who will likely negotiate on Scotland’s behalf, but by the other nations that play a pivotal role in the annual bartering at CFP negotiations. Jamie McGrigor mentioned that there are 30 votes for Scotland that come from the UK delegation. That may be the case, but the votes are of use only if they are marshalled in the interests of Scotland and its fishing communities. For too long, that has not been the case. Those votes have not been marshalled in the best interests of Scotland’s fishing communities. Indeed, Scotland’s fishing communities have very much been an afterthought in that regard.

Claire Baker talks about reduced influence, but at the moment we are talking about having virtually no influence, particularly at the negotiating table. It is a credit to the cabinet secretary that he is there, pushing Scotland’s agenda. However, Scotland is not represented at the negotiating table by the cabinet secretary—we place our fate in the hands of UK ministers. Far too often, UK ministers have sat at that table, with Scotland’s fate in their hands, and demonstrated that they have butter fingers and have dropped the ball. I listened to Claire Baker say in her speech that the CFP’s failures are evident for all to see. Would that her predecessors and Westminster colleagues who have gone to Europe to negotiate on Scotland’s behalf had had such foresight, vision and clarity of focus on the CFP.

No, I have given way once already. We might then not have found ourselves in this position, in terms of what we have put forward from Scotland on the CFP and the needs of Scotland’s fishing communities. This is a moment of opportunity. It is an opportunity to radically reform fisheries management in Europe that must not be squandered. There is a great opportunity to act on discards and decentralisation, which most of us in the chamber will welcome. However, the key message is that things such as the move towards decentralisation can and should go further. I know that Scottish National Party MEPs will push for that in the European Parliament and I hope that they will be able to rely on support from colleagues in other parties in this chamber and support from other member states across Europe. Those moves must be advanced to make fisheries management tangible and beneficial to fishing communities. For too long, the top-down, centralised structure of the CFP has strangled our fishing communities. Unfortunately, many of them have failed to recover. There is still hope, however, that a radical reform in that direction can inject a bit of life back into those areas. As well as opportunities, there are threats, two of which come from attempts to introduce mandatory elements through amendments to the CFP. Mandatory TFCs are a threat to Scotland’s historic rights and they entirely misunderstand and undermine the concept of regionalising fisheries management. The notion of centralising mandatory requirements at the same time as regionalising fisheries management is counterintuitive. Similarly, the proposed fish stock recovery areas also seem ill thought out and tacked on, and they must be resisted at every opportunity. That is not to say that stock recovery is not important, or that efforts should not be made to conserve fish stock. Opposing that measure does not send out that message—rather, it clearly says that to arbitrarily set aside anywhere between 10 and 20 per cent of waters for mandatory fish stock recovery totally misunderstands and undermines the ability of nations to best manage their waters and regionally manage their fisheries. That has to be opposed. I know that the SNP will strongly oppose it in the European Parliament and I hope that SNP members can rely on support from the other parties represented in this chamber and from other parties across Europe. This is a moment of opportunity. It is a chance for Europe to right some of the wrongs that have been done to our fishing communities over time. I look forward to the cabinet secretary taking forward these arguments and, I hope, being listened to by his UK counterpart. I hope that, in future, we will be able to mandate the cabinet secretary to go to Brussels and negotiate on behalf of Scotland.

It is nice to be foremost in Gavin Brown’s thoughts. Further on in the Official Report of the Finance Committee meeting to which Mr Brown referred, HMRC stated that it could charge Scotland up to an additional £8 million a year depending on what changes were made to its tax system and that it could, indeed, delay the implementation of or even refuse to administer any changes to taxation. It would have been helpful if that part of the Official Report of the Finance Committee meeting had been referred to. What steps can the cabinet secretary take on the control measures to ensure that revenue Scotland will be more efficient and effective than HMRC and will continue to deliver better value for money for the Scottish public purse?

I note a personal interest in the subject. Is the cabinet secretary aware of research that is being undertaken on the use of iPad technology to help to address the communication needs of children with autism and improve their educational attainment? Has the Scottish Government commissioned research, or is it keeping an eye on international research, on the issue?

I have been weighing up how best to respond to Lewis Macdonald’s comments on the referendum in Aberdeen. Frankly, the best way is just to ignore them and allow the people to deliver their verdict, which I am sure they will continue to do through the letters pages of The Press and Journal and the Evening Express. Those letters have almost unanimously been opposed to Labour’s actions in Aberdeen.

No—do not be silly. In the Sunday Herald this weekend, an advert appeared in which a diverse range of individuals from across Scotland’s many sectors and communities voiced their support for independence. They included a number of individuals from my region of North East Scotland, again from a diverse range of backgrounds. From the business community, there was Stewart Spence, the owner of the Marcliffe hotel in Aberdeen, and Richard Tinto, the managing director of Tinto Architecture in Aberdeen. Both those successful businessmen from the north-east said that they believe that Scotland’s future is best as an independent country. From the faith and community activist area, there was Abdul Latif, a highly respected member of the Muslim community in the north-east and the Aberdeen mosque, saying that he believes that Scotland’s future is best as an independent country. From a military background, there was Andy Brown, a war veteran and the president of Aboyne Royal British Legion, saying that he feels that Scotland’s future is best as an independent country. When I saw Andy Brown sign the declaration, it brought to mind my grandfather, a veteran of world war two, who fought with the Gordon Highlanders during the campaign in Burma. For those who will read this Official Report and who may not be familiar with them, the Gordon Highlanders were the regiment that was scrapped by the Conservatives. That decision destroyed some of the fine traditions of that regiment. The Labour Government carried through that policy by destroying other regiments, and that will potentially be carried further by Philip Hammond. Successive United Kingdom Governments have shown a disgraceful disregard for Scottish military history. Although my grandfather was a veteran of the British campaign in world war two, he was also a believer in Scottish independence. Not because he was ashamed, embarrassed or opposed to what had happened in his past, but because he recognised that what had happened in terms of a shared campaign and history could be celebrated as an independent country, and, furthermore, that nations would continue to co-operate in the best interests of the international community as independent, mature nations. That was his firm belief and one of the reasons why he supported independence. I am sure that that is a reason why Andy Brown, too, supports independence, as do a range of other individuals from military backgrounds who have either signed the declaration or stated their support for independence. Sadly, my grandfather passed away in 2010. He did not live to see me being elected to the Parliament, nor to see the start of the yes campaign, but I know that he would be happy that that campaign has started, and with the range of people who are backing it. I became a father in 2008 and my second child arrived in 2011. The arrival of my children has strengthened my belief that we need independence because I want to build a better Scotland, not only for everybody else’s children but for my own. I look at them and the future that lies ahead of them. I look at what the UK Government is doing in so many areas, such as welfare and disabilities, and that makes me anxious and worried for my children’s future. An independent Scotland could build a more socially just nation for our children. That is why people who firmly believe in social justice, such as Dennis Canavan, are backing independence. They recognise that a socially just future is far more possible in an independent Scotland than if we remain anchored to the United Kingdom and the cuts that are being imposed on us. I listened to the Labour Party when we debated the concept of welfare cuts being undertaken. They said that it was okay, and that if it came back to power, everything would be all right—just as it was in 1997 when one of the first acts of the Labour Government was to slash disability benefits. That is what social justice means to the Labour Party at UK level. I firmly believe that there are members on the Labour benches who are committed campaigners for social justice, but they must recognise that remaining a part of the United Kingdom dilutes rather than enhances that opportunity. There are many successful, small nations across our planet, and it does not behove the anti-independence parties to throw insults about the arc of insolvency, or to laugh at and deride the trials and tribulations that some of our neighbours, including Ireland and Iceland, have gone through. Those small, independent nations have encountered difficulties, but they do so and continue to do so, and come through them, as small, independent nations. They weather the storms as independent nations—yes, as part of the international community, and often co-operating together in a range of ways, but they remain true to their state as independent nations. We can quite clearly see that the figures demonstrate that the small, independent nations are recovering at a much greater rate than the large, lumbering beast that is the United Kingdom. We are clear on the SNP benches that Scotland’s future is best served when it is held in Scotland’s hands. I campaign for independence because I want to build a better and more socially just Scotland, to the honour and the memory of my grandfather, and, which is important, to secure the future of my children.

I respect the fact that parties will need to lay out policy agendas for what they would do as the Government of an independent Scotland. When will the Labour Party start to do that? Does it not believe that it will ever govern in an independent Scotland?

Willie Rennie says that he believes that more powers should be devolved. What powers does he believe should not be devolved? How does he define those powers and will he explain why such decisions should not be entrusted to the people of Scotland?

Will Dr Simpson take an intervention?

I do not think that it is helpful to cast around aspersions and innuendo as to the motivations that lie behind decisions that are taken at NHS level, of which more later. I was interested in Neil Findlay’s point of order. Although I am by no means an anorak on standing orders, I understand that there is an opportunity for any member to speak against the business motion. However, I do not recall that Neil Findlay or indeed anybody else chose to speak against the motion that set out the chamber business for this week, which included yesterday’s constructive and interesting—for the most part—debate on the national parenting strategy. However, what is a little political posturing between friends? I have no constituency locus in the NHS Lothian situation and I would not seek to interfere given that I do not have an acute interest in it. I know that my colleagues who represent the area will undoubtedly have things to say on the situation. Needless to say, however, I think that the cabinet secretary’s response to it has given no lie to the fact that the Government views it in the most serious of terms. Some people could seek to fault the way in which she has chosen to intervene, as Mr Findlay has done, but they would do so for entirely the wrong reasons. We believe, and I am sure that most reasonably minded members would agree, that the cabinet secretary has responded in the most appropriate fashion.

I am sorry, but I have only four minutes. I am sure that the intervention would have been interesting. Some other time. As a member who represents North East Scotland, I was interested to read a press release on Jackie Baillie’s website—yes, I am the one person who visits it—-that states: “NHS Tayside was ... dragged into the scandal.” As a regional member for North East Scotland, I received the letter that Sandy Watson, the chairman of NHS Tayside, sent to Jackie Baillie seeking to correct her. He wrote: “I am writing to you in response to the concerns that the Scottish Labour Party has raised about the management of waiting times lists in NHS Tayside ... The figures reported in The Sunday Times related to numbers of patients waiting for a new outpatient appointment. The example highlighted was that in November 2011 ISD said there were 21,032 patients waiting for a new outpatient appointment and this was subsequently revised to 18,815 patients. This was reported as ‘patients being removed from the waiting list’. The reason for this revision, which we gave to both ISD and The Sunday Times prior to The Sunday Times publication, is transparent, straightforward and is entirely consistent with normal and acceptable routine working practice. It is not in any way related to the removal of patients from waiting lists ... I am sure you will agree with me when I say that in the talk of all these statistics patients are the most important thing and we will never forget that.” Neither will the Government. I am sure that Ms Baillie did not mean to omit this matter from her opening speech—

I am in my final 40 seconds, so I cannot. I am sure that Ms Baillie merely ran out of time before using the opportunity to apologise to the hard-working and dedicated staff of NHS Tayside for the innuendo that she cast on them in the press in that manner. For the benefit of other members, I will be happy to place a copy of the letter that I received in the Scottish Parliament information centre, as I am sure Jackie Baillie would have done, as she was the main recipient of it. It ill behoves any member to cast around innuendo and aspersions that do nothing to affect positively the morale of NHS staff. It would be far better if members paid attention to the matter at hand rather than seeking to score petty political points at the expense of our NHS staff.

A number of authorities in Scotland have taken policy decisions to refuse hot food licences within a certain distance of school establishments. Does Patricia Ferguson agree that that is one way of combating the queues of schoolchildren outside fast-food outlets that she mentioned?

I thoroughly enjoyed Alison Johnstone’s speech and I am happy that we will back her amendment at decision time. She speaks with great authority on the issue. I have had many discussions with her about sport, on Twitter and in private. Patricia Ferguson made the interesting point that we walked 63 miles a year less in 2003 than we did in 1975. I did a quick calculation and I am pretty sure that I made that difference up during the recent local election campaign but, leaving that aside, it is a worrying statistic that, as a nation, we are walking a great deal less. I am aware that I am probably in no position to lecture people on physical activity, although I made my long-awaited five-a-side football comeback at the weekend—we shall speak no more of that. I speak as somebody who, as a teenager and as a young person, was very active. I competed for my local athletics club and have district and national medals at home. However, like many, I stopped exercising in my late teens and that, combined with both a poor diet and what we shall euphemistically refer to as the student lifestyle, sent my weight spiralling upwards. It has been a struggle to reverse that ever since. Those who follow me on Twitter will know that I have chronicled that as Mark versus the flab. Nonetheless, my experience emphasises that although physical activity in our younger years is good, it has to be sustained, because stopping at any point can send someone into a period of reversal, which undoes all the good and can still lead to problems in later life. I was also interested in Patricia Ferguson’s point about children queueing at fast food outlets and, in my intervention, I raised a point about the policy decisions that some local authorities have taken in relation to licensing applications for hot food stands, mobile hot food units or hot food establishments within a certain proximity of a secondary school. I absolutely take on board the point that Patricia Ferguson made in her response to me, which was about ensuring that we provide nutritious and appetising food in our schools to encourage pupils to stay and eat there. There is one area where I have personal difficulties in that regard. My former school, Dyce Academy, which is in the area that I represented on the council and now represent as an MSP, is situated right next door to an Asda supermarket. For as long as I can remember, there have been queues of schoolchildren going into the store either to buy chips and pies from the hot food takeaway, or going into the store itself and buying less healthy products because they are available there. At the end of the day, the store probably has its profit margin in mind, and there is no doubt that the profits are heavily boosted by young people going in and purchasing such food, but when they can control what is being sold to young people, they should reflect on that and on the role that they can play in encouraging the young people who go into their stores for their lunch to make healthy choices. Prior to entering the Parliament, I was involved in the coaching of youth football. We can all see the benefits of grassroots sporting activity and what it can deliver. It is important that our society does all that it can to nurture and develop grassroots sporting clubs across the range of sporting activities. As well as the two hours of PE that has been spoken about in today’s debate, we need to focus attention on extra-curricular sporting activity. In many schools, that very much depends on having a willing teacher who is able to give up their time to provide that activity. At my school, one teacher in particular gave up a huge amount of his time to run the school basketball team. He is still at the school and still running that team, to the best of my knowledge. Once that teacher retires, will someone else take on the running of the school basketball team? That is an issue that we need to reflect on. The work that is being done to develop the Commonwealth games legacy and cashback for communities is having a positive impact on developing and nurturing grassroots sporting activity, and the Government is to be commended for its actions. Nanette Milne spoke about the Aberdeen sports village. One of the things that I was most pleased to be able to do as part of Aberdeen City Council was to push through the new 50m pool that is being developed in Aberdeen. Again, that will massively benefit my and Nanette Milne’s constituents in the Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire areas by giving them access to such high quality facilities in the north-east of Scotland. I agree that we are talking about not just sport, but getting people to be more active in general. Walking instead of using the car is something that we can all do that can have a big impact. We should all aspire to a more active nation, and as members of the Parliament we should do all that we can to lead by example. Society will, undoubtedly, reap the benefits as a result.

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister agree that an issue that affects fathers—albeit that it is outwith the Scottish Government’s remit—is the short time that they are given for paternity leave, which often does not allow them to pick up some of the slack, especially if the mother has postnatal depression, or allow time for significant bonding with their child?

As another father of a daughter, and of a son, I recognise much of what my colleague Dennis Robertson said. My brother had a not dissimilar reaction to that of Dennis Robertson when he found out that his wife was expecting twins. I will cover three areas: postnatal depression; paternity leave, which I raised in my intervention; and play. On postnatal depression, during a Finance Committee discussion on family-nurse partnerships, the issue of the psychological impact on the child of a parent with postnatal depression was highlighted. That is why it is key that we consider how to ensure early diagnosis of postnatal depression. A suggestion that I throw forward is that the minister could speak to her colleagues in the Government about whether, at the six-week postpartum check-up that every woman has, women could be asked to complete the Edinburgh scale test, which detects postnatal depression. That might help with early diagnosis of the condition, which can often be missed, and would prevent women from developing more severe postnatal depression further down the line. Another issue that we perhaps need to look at is how we develop and nurture support groups for women with postnatal depression, both support groups that are co-ordinated by local authorities or health boards and ones that come together organically when they are formed by women in communities who know each other and know that they are suffering from postnatal depression. How can we support those groups to ensure that they develop and help those women? Organisations such as Home-Start Aberdeen, which recruits and trains volunteers to visit families at home and offer them informal, friendly and confidential support, have a vital role to play in signposting and in helping to identify people. I touched on paternity leave in my intervention on the minister. As I have been through the process myself, what I am saying might sound a bit selfish. As a local authority councillor, I was in the fortunate position that I could work more from home, which meant that I got a bit more time with my children, but often that is not possible and the father has only a fleeting two weeks with the child. Paternity leave does not take into account the fact that the woman might have complications. For example, if the mother has had a C-section, she has six weeks when she cannot drive and is not allowed to do any heavy lifting. If she has older children who are perhaps four or five years old, it can be a real difficulty if she is not allowed to lift them to any great degree or carry them and is unable to go out and do the shopping. Consideration must be given to those issues. I acknowledge that the matter is not within the remit of the Scottish Government, but I hope that the minister might factor those issues into her considerations and the discussions that she might have with her UK counterparts. I believe that play is vital in developing children’s social skills and more needs to be done to increase opportunities for play. I welcome the funding that the Scottish Government has allocated in that regard. Local organisations in my area, such as Aberdeen Play Forum, are doing a lot of work to try to increase opportunities for play by working with a range of organisations. We must also include reading within play. I always remember the quote attributed to Albert Einstein: “If you want your children to be intelligent, read them fairy tales. If you want them to be more intelligent, read them more fairy tales.” Initiatives such as bookbug, which is run by the Scottish Book Trust, are vital. Although we focus on a wide range of areas, the most important advice that we can give to parents is this: play with your children and read them bedtime stories.

Will the member give way?

Perhaps this is an opportunity for members in the chamber to provide constructive input to the strategy alongside that gathered during the consultation. Is that not a possibility?

9. To ask the Scottish Government whether it has had discussions with the staff and management of Hall & Tawse Joinery following the announcement that the business is to close, given the impact on employment in the area. (S4O-00977)

Will the minister consider directing his officials to talk to the parent company, Balfour Beatty, on potential redeployment options within its reshaped organisation? After all, Hall & Tawse has operated since 1880 and trained thousands of apprentices in Aberdeen, and it would be a shame for that heritage to be lost.

Mr Macintosh surely cannot have missed the successive comments from the Federation of Small Businesses, which has highlighted the importance of the small business bonus scheme in keeping many small businesses afloat and helping them through the recession.

Mary Scanlon is right to say that the world was a very different place in 1936, when we had come through the great depression. Is she aware of the work of Paul Krugman, which shows that the recovery from the great depression was quicker than has been the recovery under the UK Government at present?

A little under 18 months ago, on 24 January 2011, an article appeared on the BBC news website stating: “Aberdeen is the British city best-placed to grow out of the economic downturn”. That was according to the think tank Centre for Cities and its “Cities Outlook 2011” index, which “found that Aberdeen had the best growth prospects”. Just two months ago, The Herald published the encouraging news that “Santander is looking to further expand its presence in Scotland and is targeting growth in Aberdeen.” According to that report, Kevin Boyd, divisional director at the bank “was keen to boost the bank’s presence in the north-east during 2012” and had said: “There is a great opportunity in Aberdeen as there is still a boom there. We have been providing support from the central belt up until now but it is difficult to get into deals when we are not up there all the time ... So as well as a little bit of organic growth in the support staff for the central belt Aberdeen will be the next beachhead for us.” That is welcome news for the north-east. Moreover, on 26 March, a Press and Journal article said: “Aberdeen was the only major city in the UK to grow its economy during the recession, according to a report published today. The Granite City outperformed both London and Edinburgh, the heartlands of the country’s financial sector, thanks to the continued strength of the oil and gas industry.” Supportive comment has come from Tom Smith, the chairman of Aberdeen city and shire economic future, who said: “It is vital that both the Scottish and UK governments understand our economic significance and support us in building on this position of strength by developing the right infrastructure that will ensure we continue to attract, retain and develop the necessary skills, businesses and investment to secure our long-term future.” Members will hear more from him later in my speech. Those quotations demonstrate that Aberdeen has a fundamental role to play as a powerhouse of the economy not just of Scotland but of the UK, for as long as we remain part of the wider UK economy. There are a number of other local successes across the north-east. The Rowett institute of nutrition and health has been given £10 million of funding for health-related research. Dundee has been named a hub for the rapidly developing renewables sector. Investment of £20 million is being made in life sciences companies, including investment to help Antoxis in Aberdeen with its research in the fight against Alzheimer’s. There are high-quality food and drink products across the Aberdeen area, including those from Brewdog, the independent brewer in Fraserburgh, which makes 80 per cent of its turnover from overseas sales, as was highlighted to us at the Finance Committee just yesterday morning. Deeside and the Cairngorms are one of Scotland’s six key tourism locations and will develop a destination plan to help to attract people to the area. The Banffshire Coast Tourism Partnership will also look to attract people to the area. The north-east has a lot going for it and we should celebrate the fundamental role that it is playing in boosting the economy. However, a note of caution is being sounded. Today’s editorial in The Press and Journal says: “After decades of inertia, Aberdeen looked on the verge of a new chapter of potential development and progress” with “Plans for the Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route ... an enhanced garden for the city centre” and “a new crossing over the River Don”. It continues, however: ”Today, that potential progress has come grinding to a halt ... Scottish Labour leader Johann Lamont calls us a powerhouse of the Scottish economy, but her party seems unwilling to push it forward ... The transformational City Garden Project would have helped put a heartbeat into an under-utilised and disconnected city centre. But despite far more people voting in favour of it than voted in favour of the new administration’s parties, its very future now looks in doubt ... It is to be hoped that it can be salvaged and other key developments pushed forward by this new administration. Otherwise, the city and its people will not be known as Ms Lamont’s ‘economic powerhouse’ but an area that continues to enjoy the trappings of individual wealth, but has very little to show for it.” Tom Smith, to whom I referred earlier, has said: “we do have concerns that Labour are opposed to some of the projects and initiatives ACSEF supports to drive growth in the economy and create jobs ... it is hard to believe that a political party are prepared to go against a project which secured a majority vote in a referendum. This brings both integrity and democracy into question. The third Don crossing is part of the region’s transport strategy to deliver an integrated transport network that will reduce congestion and improve the use of public transport. It is also closely linked to any developments at the Haudagain. It will be interesting to hear the new administration’s alternatives to these projects which are integral to the economic development of our city.” There is a lot to be positive about in Aberdeen at present, but we cannot afford inertia in the north-east, given what we have heard about driving the economy forward. I implore the new administration in Aberdeen to think long and hard about the potentially serious and damaging consequences of cancelling some of the infrastructure projects that are vital to the future economic growth of the north-east and of the Scottish nation as a whole. Mr Macintosh talked about the small business bonus scheme. When the Federation of Small Businesses says that that has been a lifeline, it means that if it was not in place, small businesses would have gone out of business. That would have meant less economic activity and more people unemployed. Mr Macintosh might wish to cast aspersions on the scheme, which has benefited 85,000 businesses across Scotland, but I suggest that what the FSB says demonstrates clearly that if the scheme was not in place, the small business landscape in Scotland would be in a very different place, which I would not want us to visit. I caution him seriously about considering any proposals to tinker with or undermine the small business bonus.

They will be queueing up at SPICe’s door.

Will the member give way?

In an attempt to return Mr Macintosh to the matter in hand, does he agree with me and the business community in the north-east that a move by the new council administration to shelve certain vital infrastructure projects will have grave dangers for the economy of Aberdeen and, indeed, Scotland? Will he undertake to speak to his colleagues in Aberdeen City Council to ensure that those projects are not shelved?

As I am a member of the Finance Committee, I am pleased to speak in the debate, although I was able to attend only two of the four round-table sessions that took place. The debate comes at an appropriate time. Mary Fee might want to listen to her front benchers before she gives a speech. Ken Macintosh asked why on earth we are listening to Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s and getting so obsessed by credit ratings, but she said, “I’m obsessed by the credit rating for an independent Scotland and I want the question answered.” The Labour Party might want to do some work on joined-up thinking when it has its next away day. That might help the party with its narrative in the Parliament. Given Mary Fee’s sustained invective against the Conservatives, I am sure that she will be the first to welcome the many council coalitions that Labour is striking with the Conservatives across Scotland. She will be more than happy with that, given what she has had to say about the Conservative Party today. On the independence debate being bad for the economy, I accept that perhaps Ms Fee could not watch the Finance Committee meeting this morning, but Lloyds Banking Group’s top Scottish executive, Philip Grant, said not only in that meeting but in The Scotsman that the independence debate is benefiting Scotland by giving us an increased international profile, making us a talking point across the world—including in boardrooms across the world—and attracting potential investment to Scotland. Perhaps that counters the relentless negativity that we have heard from Labour members. I want to focus on a couple of areas that the committee looked at. The thread of the demographic change that lies ahead—particularly the ageing population—has run through all the speeches that have been made thus far. I agree that we should not look at demographic change as a negative in and of itself. Our elderly population still have a great deal to give society—through the provision of grandparental care, for example, which is one of the functions that those who have retired often perform, allowing working parents to get back into work and stimulate the economy. The points that Gavin Brown and Paul Wheelhouse have made do not necessarily act against each other. Gavin Brown was quite right: people in their mid to late 60s are much more active than such people were in previous years. However, Paul Wheelhouse identified that, because we are living longer, the likelihood—or potential—of our having serious health complications obviously increases. I stand here as a shining example of Scotland’s bad diet. We have particular problems with diet and lack of activity, and we need to consider them. People might live an extra 20 or 30 years, but that does not necessarily mean that problems will not arise as a result. During the round-table discussion on demographic change, I raised the issue of migration and the need to attract skilled working-age migrants to Scotland. There is a real clash in that area between the policies that are being pursued at the UK level and the need to develop Scotland-specific solutions. I think that both Professor Jeffery and George MacKenzie of the National Records of Scotland, who produced a table that looked at the prospects if we have low net migration and an ageing population, agreed with that point. We have to focus on how we can engender a culture change within the UK Border Agency so that it can see the need for a particular set of solutions for Scotland in the short term—until, of course, we control our own migration policy, when we can develop solutions for ourselves. On universal services, there is often an obsession with popular policies, such as those relating to bus passes, free prescriptions and the council tax freeze. We are always told that we cannot afford such policies, but members should look at how much we spend on those individual policies in the context of the global budget. A huge proportion of the global budget is not being spent on those policies. Some people have the mindset that somehow in difficult times, Governments should not do popular things. The UK coalition Government might be pursuing that policy—if it is, it is doing so very successfully—but the Scottish Government is quite right to stick to its guns and say that universal services policies are not just popular but have wider social benefits, which Margaret Burgess specifically highlighted. A lot of work still needs to be done: for example, to change attitudes across Scotland, particularly in relation to deprivation and how we target particular services and funding towards areas of deprivation. If tackling deprivation was easy, we would have done it by now—and we would have done so much better in the good times. We are now in very difficult economic circumstances, but that does not mean that we should not strive to effect change in our most deprived areas to ensure that children who are born in those communities do not find that, essentially, they have been born to fail. All members should unite behind that.

Does the minister agree that proceeding with the Haudagain project before the AWPR is completed and able to take some of the load off the roundabout will create an absolute transport nightmare? Does he also agree that it is a bit ironic for the Labour Party to be pushing the Haudagain roundabout, given that its council group’s proposal relied on a third crossing over the Don, an option that the Labour Party itself opposed?

I congratulate my colleague George Adam on bringing his motion to the chamber. I know that the issue has for him and others a great deal of personal resonance. That is the case for me, too, because my best friend’s wife is one of the 10,500 Scots with MS. George Adam spoke about his understanding of MS and he mentioned prominent 1980s DJs who had the condition. I am a little bit younger than George Adam, so I do not recall those instances. What brought the condition to my attention was Brian Irvine, the Aberdeen footballer, announcing that he was suffering from MS. “Suffering” was the term that he used at the time; I know that we try not to use that term, but as Margaret Burgess has identified, many people who have MS tell you directly that it is a condition that leads to varying degrees of suffering for them, on occasions. On Monday, I was delighted to visit the Aberdeen branch of the MS Society, which operates from the Stuart resource centre in Mastrick. I also visited the stall that the society’s Inverurie branch is running in the Bon Accord centre all this week. The Stuart resource centre is unique in being a dedicated centre for the MS Society’s use. A range of activities are provided there, from gentle exercise to Thursday afternoon Scrabble and dominoes sessions, which give members an opportunity to interact and engage. At the Stuart resource centre, I spoke to a number of branch members. They raised a few concerns with me, which I will take the opportunity to highlight. One concern, which a number of members have highlighted, is about not just the benefits changes that are coming but the uncertainty about them and the lack of information. A service user told me that lack of information heightens stress, which is the last thing that people need. That struck a chord with me. All the uncertainty about what is taking place at Westminster is having a detrimental impact on those people’s health and wellbeing, before there has even been an announcement about whether the changes will have an economic impact. Another concern is the signposting of services and bodies such as the MS Society. Many people said that, when they were diagnosed, they were not given information or directed to the organisations that could benefit them. That is not unique to people with multiple sclerosis; many people have told me that, at the point of diagnosis, the health service needs to provide better signposting to organisations that can provide support and interaction with other people who have conditions. My friend whose wife has MS is diabetic. From his experience with his wife, he suggested that he, as a diabetic, has had more support to cope with diagnosis, and more psychology input and education sessions than his wife has had. He says that that needed to be looked at. It might be just a geographical issue, but the minister might want to look at provision of psychology input, education sessions and helping people to cope with the initial diagnosis, which can often cause great stress. I will make a final brief point about stigma. In an article in Monday’s Press and Journal, Marsali Craig—a woman with MS in Aberdeen—said that people misunderstand multiple sclerosis and often dismiss people with MS as being lazy or drunk. We need not just education for people who are diagnosed with MS but education about MS for the wider population. I hope that all members will do everything they can to tackle stigma.

Will the member give way?

6. To ask the Scottish Government how many businesses in north-east Scotland have received support from the small business bonus scheme. (S4O-00914)

I thank the cabinet secretary for outlining the huge amount of money that businesses in the north-east have saved. A number of businesses have contacted me with concerns about comments made by a number of Opposition politicians about attaching additional caveats to the small business bonus scheme. Will the cabinet secretary reassure those businesses and the chamber that there will be no such caveats and that the scheme will continue to benefit businesses in its current form?

It is appropriate to thank Dame Elish Angiolini and her commission for a comprehensive report, which contains significant recommendations. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice is to be commended for establishing the commission, in seeking to address the problem. David McLetchie provided raw statistics and implied that they show that we are somehow in danger of taking the issue too far and that the situation on female offending is not as bad as we are making it out to be. However, in her intervention during his speech and in her own speech, Elaine Smith set out the reality that lies behind the statistics, with a remarkable description of the impact on the wider life of the female offender, and particularly on her children. It says in the briefing by Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People that “women offenders are more likely than men who offend to have dependent children, more likely to lose their housing while in custody, and less likely to rely on a partner outside to look after their children while they are in custody. This increases the potential for greater adverse impacts on the children of women prisoners.” There is the potential for such children to end up in the care system, with all the difficulties that can arise as a result. The children become at risk of coming to the attention of the justice system themselves at some stage in the future. It is imperative that we break that cycle. This is part of the early intervention agenda. If we can take steps to address female offending—both the committing of offences and the punishments that are being delivered to female offenders—it will have a knock-on effect, particularly on the children of women offenders. That will play an early intervention role in dealing with some of the problems that can occur further down the line. Rod Campbell rightly mentioned that economic decisions will have to be taken as a result of the recommendations. It is important that whenever the cost of applying a recommendation is calculated, we look at the benefits that will result, as we do with much of our current early intervention.

I agree absolutely. Elaine Smith was not here at the beginning of my speech, when I said that the matter falls into the early intervention and preventative spending agenda, in terms of dealing with women offenders and the impacts on the children of offenders. She made that point strongly in her speech. The issue of mental health presentations and mental health problems leaped out at me from the report. It is unacceptable that women who have significant mental health problems are being incarcerated. Those women need to be helped and looked after—not locked up. When the Cabinet Secretary for Justice considers the recommendations, I hope that he will speak with the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy and her ministerial team about the mental health strategy that the Government is developing, and how women offenders fit into that strategy. It is important that we have cross-departmental work, as well as work that is focused in the justice department. I agree with Maureen Watt that we need to consider a culture change in our judicial system and among our judiciary. I understand David McLetchie’s point that we should respect the independence of the judicial system, but we must engender a change in attitude within that system. It is not just politicians who say that. I quote from John Scott—not the Deputy Presiding Officer, but the chairman of the Howard League for Penal Reform in Scotland—who said: “The sentences” that women offenders “are receiving is a significant indicator that it is the judicial response which we need to be looking at. The judiciary need to be re-educated and reassess their approach.” It is fair to say that the statistics that are before us—especially on serious violent crime—raise the question of why so many women who commit non-serious and non-violent crimes find themselves imprisoned, particularly for short periods of time, and then falling into a cycle of re-offending. I conclude with an example from the north-east of Scotland. Lewis Macdonald and Maureen Watt rightly highlighted the community integration unit at Craiginches prison in Aberdeen. The unit has clearly demonstrated success in ensuring that women break the cycle of reoffending and are better reintegrated into the community. As well as wide-scale reform of what currently exists, we must tease out the current best practice, continue to promote it and, perhaps, expand on it. Aberdeen City Council’s connections programme is a range of modules that are designed to help women improve “connections with themselves, with others and with the community” and ensure that they can better reintegrate into the community and break the cycle of re-offending. It is not just about wide-scale change; it is also about replicating what is good in the system.

Does the member agree with Ellis Thorpe, the Labour candidate for Inverurie and district, who said in The Press and Journal on 4 April: “Arguably the problem isn’t ‘cuts in public grants,’ but the long-term dependence on taxpayer handouts. Isn’t a re-examination of subsidised public transport by economists and politicians long overdue in the interests of taxpayers”?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

What does he have that I don’t?

Anyone would think that there was an election on. Far be it for me to deviate from the tone that has been so graciously set for us today. The comments of Jenny Marra, who discussed the difficulties for certain communities in Dundee, struck me as being a little rich. Labour’s Dundee City Council budget would have cut £210,000 from non-committed spending in the supported services budget that was specifically for buses and would have meant that the council could not have added further routes or invested in existing ones. By contrast, the SNP Administration in Dundee gave £50,000 to National Express, which was in addition to the £500,000 that was given from the Scottish Government green bus fund to support the bringing of 10 eco buses to Dundee. This is about delivering for Dundee, not dithering for Dundee. I know that the minister has been outed by Holyrood magazine and that he will get his dancing shoes on in the not-too-distant future, but the Labour Party is undertaking a bizarre dance on concessionary travel. Dr Murray has stood up and said, “I’m not telling you to take the bus pass away from people over the age of 60 who work; I’m just asking you to think about listening to somebody else who is telling you to do that.” We know the reason for that: the Labour Party will then be able to say, “We didn’t suggest this. It’s not the Labour Party that is suggesting this, but the Scottish Government is now actively considering taking away your bus pass. Naughty ministers are considering doing that.” It is inconceivable that a member should stand up and say, “You should consider what somebody else has said, but I’m not recommending that you actually do what they are suggesting. I’m just suggesting that you look at it and then disregard it, because we don’t actually support what they are suggesting.” Dr Murray is sitting next to Mr Baker, with whom she might want to have a conversation. He put out a press release on 28 March that said that the SNP is threatening the future of the concessionary bus pass. It is interesting that Labour put out the press release before we had even agreed to listen to what Dr Murray has told us she does not actually want us to listen to. There was talk about subsidies for large private organisations, such as companies that are part of FirstGroup, which turns over hundreds of millions of pounds in profit every year. I quoted to Dr Murray the words of Ellis Thorpe, the Labour candidate for Inverurie and district on Aberdeenshire Council, who said: “Arguably the problem isn’t ‘cuts in public grants,’ but the long-term dependence on taxpayer handouts ... Isn’t a re-examination of subsidised public transport by economists and politicians long overdue in the interests of taxpayers?” That appeared in The Press and Journal in Aberdeen on 4 April. Dr Murray said that we did not give the context for the quote and that she did not know to what it referred. I can reveal to Dr Murray that the letter was written directly in response to an article in which FirstGroup in Aberdeen had claimed that the bus service operators grant cuts would cause it problems, a point that was directly contradicted by a Labour council candidate. If the Labour Party wants to trade quotes from council candidates that is fine with me, but it should check that it has it own house in order before it starts throwing stones. Elaine Murray rose— No, no. Let us consider the complaint that fare increases are chiefly the result of the changes that are being made to the bus service operators grant. “The Auld Toon News”, the newsletter of the Old Aberdeen community council, reports in relation to the high fares in Aberdeen compared with fares elsewhere: “We wrote to Firstbus to ask for their comments. While their cost base in Aberdeen is rather higher than Edinburgh and Glasgow, they consider the key issue is passenger numbers—Aberdeen buses are simply not so well used.” FirstBus in Aberdeen is telling community councils that the key issue is not the cuts to BSOG but passenger numbers. It ill behoves politicians to hold up the fig leaf of BSOG and suggest that it is somehow the all-singing, all-dancing panacea for the problem of fare increases. The issue is much more complex. I met David Stewart, the managing director of First in Aberdeen, and talked to him about the bizarre idea that increasing fares while passenger numbers are decreasing will increase patronage. I suggested that First in Aberdeen should consider a short-term drop in fares and assess its impact on patronage in the city. That would be a worthwhile experiment for First to undertake. First also needs to look again at whether the routes that it offers meet the needs of the public. To the company’s credit, that is something that it will do. The Labour Party did nothing to try to amend the budget in relation to the bus service operators grant and it ill behoves its members to shed crocodile tears that they hope will appeal to voters in the local elections in May.

I am a resident of Aberdeen and I absolutely agree with Patrick Harvie about the high fares in the city. Does he support me in calling on First to consider implementing a short-term fare drop and assessing its impact on passenger numbers, given that First said that passenger numbers are the key issue?

I seek clarification. Is Richard Baker suggesting that if the bus service operators grant funding changes were not implemented, there would be no fare increases in Scotland?

4. To ask the Scottish Government whether it has made an assessment of the likely impact of United Kingdom Government welfare reforms on carers in Scotland. (S4O-00882)

The minister will be aware that the carers allowance, although unaffected by the reforms to the benefits system, remains a pittance and that the cost of living is significantly beyond the means of many carers. Can he advise what representations have been made to the UK Government to improve the support for Scotland’s carers and the vital work that they do?

4. To ask the First Minister what representations the Scottish Government has received from charities and other organisations regarding the United Kingdom Government’s planned abolition of council tax benefit. (S4F-00610)

I thank the First Minister for his response and, unlike some, I welcome his announcement that, in partnership with COSLA, the Scottish Government will protect more than half a million vulnerable Scots from the UK Government’s cuts to council tax benefit. Does the First Minister agree that, given the Con-Dem Government’s cuts to that benefit and the Labour Party’s repeated flip-flops on the council tax freeze, the only party that can be trusted to protect society’s most vulnerable people and those who are most in need by truly being with them in tough times is the Scottish National Party?

Where Malcolm Chisholm leads, I will boldly follow, as another non-member of the Justice Committee entering bravely into the fray. Never has the old quotation, “Laws are like sausages—it is better not to see them being made”, which is often attributed to Otto von Bismarck, been more apt. The bill is a complex one that deals with complex issues. Christine Grahame, David McLetchie and Rod Campbell, who, unlike me, are all qualified legal professionals, have identified how difficult a bill it is. As a mere layman, I must be perfectly frank and admit that I have found a deal of the process and the technical content of part 1 extremely difficult to comprehend, and I am sure that many people on the street would do so, too. The litmus test of any bill of this Parliament is not whether it makes for easy bedtime reading but whether it will deliver outcomes that are of benefit to wider Scottish society. That is the test that we must apply to any bill that is introduced. I do not think that it is unreasonable that the bill includes extremely complex and technical elements, given that it seeks to resolve a complex legal technicality. The question is whether, in passing the bill, we would deliver benefits. It is through that prism that I will view the bill. I want to assess whether it will have a beneficial impact for society as a whole. Graeme Pearson rightly identified that, in that regard, a key consideration must be ensuring that victims, families of victims and witnesses understand the bill and benefit from it. In its response to paragraph 95 of the committee’s report, the Scottish Government states: “We are keen to explore with stakeholders, in the context of developing a Victims and Witnesses Bill, whether further steps could be taken ... to enhance the ability of victims and witnesses to better understand the practical effect of decisions made.” That is very much a live issue for the Government. It is clear that it is keen to ensure that victims, witnesses and, where appropriate, relatives of victims have an understanding of the process and how it affects them, and what the outcomes of it are likely to be. We should not expect such people to be legal experts, although many of them acquire a good understanding of the legal process as they go through the system. As someone who has spoken to a number of relatives of victims and witnesses, I know that they develop quite a strong understanding of the legal system as a result of their experiences and their exposure to it. As well as accepting the need for such people to understand the legal system, we should not dismiss the fact that many of them develop an acute understanding of how it works. We should not lose sight of the fact that, although the two sections in part 1 of the bill have, in effect, been christened with the names of the cases that gave rise to their being necessary, those cases are not the only ones to which those two sections do or could apply. The cabinet secretary has identified that only a small number of cases that are in the system at the moment would fall into that category, but it is worth remembering that the cases in question are very serious criminal cases that give rise to significant public safety concerns. It is therefore important that any anomalies in the judicial process and the sentencing system are dealt with to ensure that cases like Petch and Foye do not arise in future. It has been suggested that there should be a wider review of sentencing. The obvious drawback in that is that a quick fix might be required for a situation like that in the Petch and Foye cases. By definition, a wider review of sentencing would take a longer time and the length of time taken could mean that further anomalies would not be prevented. It was therefore perfectly appropriate for the Government to introduce the bill, particularly part 1, as a fix that is required for very serious criminal cases. Part 2 was clearly driven by the al-Megrahi case, but we cannot rule out the possibility—however remote—that a similar case or another case with similar connotations will arise in future. It is entirely appropriate for the Government to put in place provisions that will allow some of the difficulties that were faced during the process of the al-Megrahi case to be ironed out so that they will not be an issue in future cases. I support the bill’s general principles. I merely observe that, although I do not possess my colleague Mr Finnie’s understanding of part 1, which he referred to as “the easy bit”, we will take up Mr Pearson’s suggestion—I have offered to draw the pictures for Mr Finnie’s book.

The First Minister will be aware of the on-going situation on the Elgin platform that is operated by Total in the North Sea. What input has the Scottish Government had into the on-going monitoring, and what discussions has it had with United Kingdom ministers and industry representatives regarding contingencies for gas supply? Will he join me in welcoming the speedy evacuation of the platform, which ensured that the safety of hundreds of offshore workers was not placed at risk?

Can the minister elaborate on work that is under way to identify blockages in the system, particularly in relation to moving forward on local development plans? Aberdeen City Council has led the way in getting its local development plan in place; other local authorities are perhaps not getting the work done as quickly as possible. What is being done in that regard?

Presiding Officer, as a former member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee—although, to be frank, if you had blinked, you would have missed me—I always take great pleasure in contributing to rural affairs debates, especially because I represent North East Scotland, which has a vibrant farming sector. I will focus on the issue of new entrants, which has come up quite a lot in the debate and is vital to the emphasis behind the bill. The point was made by Dennis Robertson that in no way should the bill, or any attempts to improve the situation for tenants, be viewed as a threat to landlords. In improving the situation for tenants and new entrants, we also have the opportunity to improve the situation for landlords. Given the decline in the number of tenancies, anything that we can do to boost that will improve the situation for many landlords. It is fair to say that there is wide recognition among parties and stakeholders that something needs to be done to improve the situation and encourage new entrants. I note with interest that the committee said in its report, at paragraph 87, that “attempting to reverse the current trend of falling numbers of agricultural tenancies will require long-term policy making, using a range of tools, including legislation.” The committee’s comments acknowledge that although the bill will make a welcome contribution, other aspects will need to be looked at if we are to encourage new entrants into the tenant farming sector. I do not think that any member disagrees with that.

A number of factors prevent new entrants from coming into the sector—I certainly do not think that there is just a single contributory factor in that regard. I will come on to that. Ideas will no doubt come forward from many places on how to encourage new entrants and on how to encourage landlords to take on tenants and give them land. I will throw out what I hope is a constructive suggestion from the NFU in my area—North East Scotland—which is that priority be given by landlords to new starts in relation to rural priorities, as part of the Scotland rural development programme. That approach would be attractive to landlords, because there would be more likelihood of investment if they leased to a new-start tenant. The potential for a new-starts category could be looked at, as part of the wider picture. Dave Stewart and Alex Fergusson—in intervening on Rob Gibson—raised the parity of tax regime but disparity of outcome that exists north and south of the border. There is no silver bullet. I have heard complaints from farmers in my region about the difficulty of obtaining finance from the banking sector. Where we can apply specific Scottish solutions, we should consider doing so. I look forward to that debate taking place.

Let us knock on the head a false dichotomy—the claim that somehow we do not support certain measures in the budget. We have recognised that there are some welcome measures contained deep within the budget that relate to, for example, the computer games industry and the offshore sector in my region. Admittedly, they reverse damage that was done before. It is a bit like a person thanking the man who has turned up at their door with a couple of buckets of water, but who had set fire to their house in the first place. Nonetheless, I am a charitable man and welcome the fact that the UK Government has seen the error of its ways in that regard. The problem is that we cannot simply extract a couple of welcome gestures in the budget and ignore what is happening more widely. SNP members have emphasised that point throughout the debate. It would be good if, just occasionally, the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats showed a little bit of self-awareness and humility and admitted the damage that some of the budget will do, particularly to some of the lowest-paid in society. My colleague Jamie Hepburn made that point eloquently. He pointed out—he did not use our own figures or party-political spin, but rather the Treasury’s and the IFS’s figures—that the lowest paid 20 per cent will suffer the most hardship as a result of the measures in the budget. That is equivalent to double the average impact on their personal income. We can talk about taking people out of paying tax, but all that does is present a panacea, whereas the measure is a fig leaf behind which are hidden the pressures that will be borne by the lowest-paid in society. As a result of the hikes in VAT and fuel duty and the taking away of tax credits, money is being put in people’s pockets with one hand while the other hand is reaching round to take money out of their other pocket. That is exactly what the UK Government is doing to the lowest-paid in society; it is nothing to do with improving their lot. We have heard about what Citizens Advice Scotland has said. The chief executive of Citizens Advice at the UK level, Gillian Guy, has said: “Raising the personal tax allowance is an empty gesture to struggling families on low wages. Poorer working families who get housing and council tax benefits will not get all of the money in their pocket, because as their income goes up, their benefits will go down.” People are being given with one hand, but it is being taken away with the other. There were opportunities for growth that could have been pursued as part of the budget, but they were ignored. There is nothing in the budget about improving growth, getting the economy moving and getting people back into work. Brendan Barber, the general secretary of the Trades Union Congress, said: “We needed a budget that looked to the future and made jobs—particularly for young people—the national priority. Instead we have got a budget for the rich by the rich.” That is exactly what it is. Even Charles Moore, that well-known socialist, made that point, writing in The Daily Telegraph: “I did notice an interesting reply that Mr Osborne gave when challenged on the Today programme about his own income. ‘My salary is less than the £150,000 threshold,’ he said. ‘I am not a big winner from this Budget.’” By his own admission, those who earn more than £150,000 are the big winners from the budget. It is the rich who are the big beneficiaries as a result of the budget. Simply by employing a clever piece of accountancy trickery, the richest have been able to dictate the level of the highest rate of tax in the country. That is extremely unfortunate. Instead of kowtowing to the highest paid in the country, the Government could have done so much more to get the economy moving.

I will give Mr Brown an opportunity to redeem himself.

Oh dear. I have made quite clear the actual equalisation impact that the UK Government has put in place. In fact, it is not just an equalisation impact. It is a regressive impact, because of all the other pressures that the UK Government is applying to people. Mr Brown can talk about raising the income tax threshold, but the fact is that the UK Government is taking money away from people at the same time as it is pretending to them that they will get more. An example of a tax cut that would have been welcome is a cut in the VAT on small improvements to houses, which would have got the economy moving and increased jobs. Instead, we have a budget for the rich, by the rich. The Scottish Government is doing what it can within its powers—by increasing capital spend and delivering the living wage, the council tax freeze and the abolition of prescription charges—to get the economy moving and help low-paid families. Low-paid families in Scotland will recognise which Government is working for them.

When I saw that we were to debate childcare again, I was worried that I would have a sense of déjà vu, but this week’s debate is taking place in a different context. It is good to see that the Liberal Democrats have followed up their strongly held commitment to childcare in Scotland by not bothering to turn up for the debate this week. Johann Lamont said that we need somehow to learn that children are not just for conferences and implied that the SNP does not really care about Scotland’s children. As a father and an uncle, I found those comments rather unnecessary. No party or politician has a monopoly on caring about or wanting the best for Scotland’s children. It ill behoves any politician—particularly a party leader—to try to make such a distinction and create some sort of clear blue water between the political parties. The minister was right to make it clear that we want a constructive debate. There were at least glimmerings of constructiveness in Johann Lamont’s speech, although there were not quite enough of them.

Mr Smith has clearly been taking intervention lessons from Mr Findlay. Perhaps he should stop doing so. It has to be said that at no point in the conference did the First Minister imply that other politicians or political parties did not care about Scotland’s children. That is the distinction that I would draw in that regard. As the person who governs Scotland, the First Minister is perfectly entitled to make commitments to Scotland’s children in a governmental and legislative context.

Mr Findlay might find talking about Scotland’s children tiresome—

That is personal taste, and the feeling is mutual. The key issue, as identified by the minister in her opening remarks, is the need to transform the system. The Children in Scotland briefing, which we all received this morning, highlights examples that illustrate why a commitment to 600 hours of early education is welcome. The message has to be put across that the key consideration is reforming the system and making it work better for parents. That is why there is a legislative context for the commitment to 600 hours. It is all very well for us to increase the hours that are available to children, but we must also ensure that the system works not only for children but for their parents, which means ensuring that flexibility is inherent in the arrangements. The Children in Scotland briefing welcomes the fact that Scotland is the only United Kingdom nation that is currently represented on the European Commission thematic working group on early childhood education and care. It urges the Government to take inspiration from successful integrated strategies that have been adopted in a number of European countries. Although the commitment to 600 hours puts us at the vanguard in the UK context, we should have wider vision and be looking at strong international examples. I have a three-year-old son who is currently in the nursery education system. In a selfish capacity, it would be easy for me to come to the chamber and say that we should increase the hours, as that would benefit him. However, I want a holistic system to be developed—something that is meaningful for Scotland’s children. Boosting hours is key and will benefit children, but it is important to consider what lies behind that so that, when my one-year-old daughter goes into the system in two years’ time, we will have put in place legislation to transform the system, to make it work for her and the rest of the children in Scotland who will be entering nursery education at that time, and for the parents of those children. That is why it is important that we get this right, and I hope that we can move forward on a constructive, cross-party basis on that.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

During the minister’s discussions, was the issue of asset transfer raised? In Aberdeen, the opportunity to secure the building to develop social enterprise models in future would be a welcome boost. Has that been raised, or will the minister consider raising it in future?

I hesitate to say it, but I think that Mr Macintosh has oversimplified the process at Glencraft, which involved more than just the Government intervening. There was private sector and local authority support as well, which was the key to saving Glencraft—it was not simply the fact that the Government intervened.

The charitable thing to do following Mary Scanlon’s speech would be to note that at least one of the UK Government parties has bothered to turn up to the chamber to defend its stance in relation to Remploy. Yet again, the Liberal Democrats are posted missing. I express my disappointment at the announcement. I believe that there is a need to consider what was actually said in the Sayce review. The DWP’s response to the consultation on the Sayce review noted that the review recommended that “by the end of the current Spending Review, the Department should have introduced a new model for Remploy”. It also noted that the review said that: “Remploy businesses should be given the opportunity to become successful, independent businesses”, and that, where businesses were not viable, “employees should receive a comprehensive support package to find alternative employment”, which should be delivered through access to work. However, the DWP’s consultation document also says: “As resources are limited, it may not be possible to implement all of the recommended improvements to Access to Work straight away.” That means that although we are removing the support that is provided by Remploy, we are putting people into supported access to work, which the document readily accepts is not yet fit for purpose. I find that unfortunate. A failure to give Remploy enough time to make viable businesses is one of the key problems that I have with what is happening. I recognise the work that is being done in Dundee, but I will focus on Aberdeen, as it is one of the sites that are specifically earmarked for closure. A social enterprise model is being developed in Aberdeen. As Kevin Stewart rightly pointed out, the site operates as a social enterprise hub. For example, Bennachie upholsterers, which is a combination of Cornerstone and Glencraft, operates on the site beside the Remploy factory. A commercial business rents space there, and there is further commercial interest in renting space there, too. Further, a social enterprise is expressing an interest in operating the canteen on the site. As part of the attempts to move towards a social enterprise model, Remploy in Aberdeen has developed a textiles business, which it has established as a holistic business, trading within Remploy. However, it is in its infancy and has not yet had time to grow into a successful business and demonstrate its viability. The rug is essentially being pulled from underneath Remploy in Aberdeen, as it has not had a chance to demonstrate its long-term viability. Indeed, although there is a suggestion that a laundry business could be developed at Remploy as a possible future option, the uncertainty that has been created by the UK Government’s announcement throws that into doubt. That is why I raised with the minister the point about the critical nature of asset transfer. Where I differ from the suggestion that Labour puts forward in its amendment is that, following discussions with individuals at Remploy in Aberdeen, I do not think that moving from one model of governmental support to another is necessarily what is being sought. The same applies to article 19 funding. Individuals at Remploy in Aberdeen agree that, where that funding can be unlocked through tendering processes, it would be welcome, but they do not believe that it should be used in every example or as a way of replacing grant-aided expenditure. I agree entirely with the principle that article 19 funding should be considered—but it should be considered in the wider context of the tendering processes.

That was not what I said at all. Remploy wants to look at all possible options for the future. I said that asset transfer is critical because the opportunity for Remploy in Aberdeen to secure the building and the equipment within it would unlock a significant opportunity, allowing the new businesses that have developed to hit the ground running, and creating an opportunity for small businesses to continue to be grown and investment to continue to be attracted. I talk about attracting investment because, for social enterprise models to be successful, there must be buy-in from the private sector, as we have seen with Glencraft. I accept entirely the analogy that Labour has drawn with Glencraft, but I think that its direction is misguided because to say that Glencraft was saved purely as a result of the Scottish Government’s intervention is to misrepresent the process. When Glencraft ran into significant difficulties in November 2009, a range of organisations, including the Scottish Government and the local authority, intervened. However, the critical element was the intervention of Production Services Network. PSN helped to create a new business plan for Glencraft and supported it, with support from both public sector and private sector sources. PSN pledged £100,000 to find new and more suitable premises for the business. Without that support from PSN, it would not have mattered a merry jot how much support the Scottish Government and the local authority were willing to give Glencraft.

No. I am afraid that I am in my last 30 seconds, otherwise I would have taken Ms Marra’s intervention. Support from the Government and the local authority would not have been able to create the viable business that the intervention from PSN allowed. I believe that there is a desire to work towards some form of grant-free scenario through the development of viable small businesses, whether under the social enterprise model or another model, and that the UK Government’s decision will potentially hinder that. We must consider how we support Remploy and its employees going forward.

Will Mr Fraser give way?

Will Mr Fraser take a brief intervention on that point?

Does the member share the concerns that have been expressed to me that, although the review makes it clear that businesses within Remploy should be given an opportunity to prove themselves viable, they have not been given any timescale within which to prove themselves viable and the decision has come far too early for that to be the case?

Taking all that into consideration, how will the move by Mr McArthur’s party, as part of the UK Government, to withdraw tax credits from 73,300 Scottish families, help to make childcare more affordable for them?

It takes a brass neck for the Lib Dems to come to the chamber to complain about the affordability of childcare while they vote in coalition with the Tories at Westminster to remove tax credits from more than 73,000 families in Scotland and, as Malcolm Chisholm rightly pointed out, to decrease the amount that can be received for childcare costs from 80 to 70 per cent. That will have a detrimental impact on working families and single-parent families in Scotland. Liz Smith said in reply to the cabinet secretary’s intervention that it is better to be in work than on benefits. These people are in work: they receive tax credits because they are in work. The policy that is being pursued by Liz Smith’s party—the Conservative Party—and the Liberal Democrats in government at Westminster is harming working families. These are not well-off working families; there is often a misconception that only the well-off will be affected by the changes. We are talking about any lone-parent family that earns more than £26,000 per year, and any two-parent family that earns more than £32,000 per year, which would be two people earning around £16,500 each—that is well below the national average. Those are the people who will be harmed by that policy and who will find it all the more difficult to afford childcare as a result. I class myself as a parent first and a politician second, and the issue of affordable childcare is close to my heart. I have often spoken to other parents about it when I have been picking my son up from nursery or playgroup. I am well aware of the pressures that people face in finding affordable childcare. The difficulty is often not with the childcare that councils provide but with private sector childcare, and I think that the Government recognises that that must be addressed. We have to try to work with private sector partners wherever possible to ensure that they are delivering affordable and accessible childcare. Although no one will deny that we need to consider such issues, I think that it is excellent news that the Scottish Government is increasing funded nursery provision for three and four-year olds and looked-after two-year-olds to 600 hours per week. I am pleased that Mr Bibby welcomed the announcement in his usual charitable fashion, neglecting to mention that, in the previous session, this Government increased provision 20 per cent and in doing so benefited 100,000 children in Scotland. That is not the only area in which we have a positive story to tell. We have not only delivered increased provision in free nursery education but invested £10 million in the early years early action fund and the child poverty strategy, which sets out how we will tackle child poverty; developed the BA course in childhood practice, which 1,000 students are taking; and supported local implementation of the early years framework. In my home city of Aberdeen, through the 3Rs—or reorganise, renovate, rebuild—schools project, we have developed state-of-the-art facilities, including the fantastic developmental nursery at Seaton, which is delivering for some of the most vulnerable youngsters in our city. That is a positive story that we can tell. Mr McArthur should not stand up and say, “All you get from the SNP is negative, negative, negative.” We have an extremely positive story to tell and we will continue to tell it to the people of Scotland, who have recognised as much. After all, we have 68 MSPs and the Liberal Democrats five—or should I say four? Clearly, having to stay for the entire debate and hear exactly what his party is delivering was just a little bit too much for Mr Scott. We have a positive story to tell, which we will continue to tell, and the people of Scotland will respect that.

Will the member give way?

I put on the record my membership of Aberdeen City Council. I welcome Richard Baker’s acknowledgment that this is a “vital project”. The cabinet secretary will be aware that, the more private sector financial backing is secured for the city garden project, the less money will require to be borrowed under tax increment financing. Will he join me in calling for further private sector donors to come forward and add to the £55 million that has been leveraged thus far from private sector donors—the majority from Sir Ian Wood—and pledged towards the project?

I thank members from across the chamber for signing my motion to facilitate the debate, although I note that, with the lone exception of Mr Macintosh, no members from parties other than the Scottish National Party are in the chamber, so we might all get home a bit sooner. I lodged the motion because I wanted to open up debate and discussion around what I see as a very important issue. The issue ties in with others on the agenda in Scotland, such as the living wage and pay day loans, which my colleague Margaret Burgess has raised in members’ business before. It is about being mature enough as a Parliament to look at the important issue of the impact of the pay dates that currently operate in Scotland, particularly on those on low pay. I am pleased that when I sought a response from organisations such as the Federation of Small Businesses, the Scottish Chambers of Commerce and the Chartered Institute of Payroll Professionals, they came back with very constructive responses in which they said that they would be willing to look at the issue in a bit more detail. I will come on to that later in my speech. The key focus of the debate for me is the impact on low-paid workers. I have been a low-paid employee, as I am sure many members have. Employees receive their pay early in December, which can be a bit of a boost as it is often an expensive time of year with Christmas and new year to come. The drawback is that because many organisations and businesses pay early in December but continue to pay at the end of January, the pay window becomes a six-week window that covers one of the most expensive times of year for many individuals. Individuals who are on a low income have to make that low income stretch for a longer period than would otherwise be the case. The reason why I thought that there might be an opportunity to discuss the issue is that the month of February is only a four-week month, so a six-week pay window for the pay that is received early in December is followed by a four-week pay window for the pay that is received at the end of January. It seems perverse that people are expected to make their pay packet stretch for six weeks over December and January but for only four weeks in February. My motion highlights the issue of pay day loans. I have spoken to people who, come the middle to the end of January, find things tough and are tempted and seduced by the offer of a short-term cash injection. My colleague, Margaret Burgess, has previously made that point eloquently in the chamber, when she has talked about the difficulties that people on low incomes often face. As a member of Aberdeen City Council, some time ago I approached the then chief executive and suggested that the council might wish to consider changing its January pay date, and the council has now done so, paying in the penultimate week of January rather than at the very end. That approach has been broadly welcomed by the council’s low-paid workers and the trade unions. I lodged my motion with the intention of instigating dialogue and discussion. I recognise that the proposal will not be universally appropriate and I do not seek a prescriptive measure that all companies and organisations must implement. I recognise that for small businesses that employ only a few people and which have cash-flow problems at the end of the month, it will not be appropriate to change the pay date, because they rely on certain income and outgoings being fixed. I do not seek to put such private sector businesses in an awkward position. However, it might be easier for the public sector to implement the measure. I hope that public sector organisations will look at the example of Aberdeen City Council and consider whether this is something that they could introduce. Larger private companies that do not rely so much on month-to-month cash flow might also consider implementing the measure. This issue predominantly affects those at the lower end of the pay scale, who suffer the most in the six-week pay window. We should do anything that we can as a Parliament to highlight the issue, and I hope that this will not be the end of the debate but that we will go forward into constructive discussion. I certainly intend to send the Official Report of the debate to the organisations that I spoke to before I lodged my motion, to let them know what members have said and to try to instigate that constructive discussion. I am interested to hear what the minister has to say. I reiterate that this is not about saying, “You must do this,” but about asking organisations and businesses across Scotland to seriously consider whether they could facilitate such a move to the benefit of their employees. I look forward to listening to the rest of the debate.

If the vote had gone in the other direction, would Sarah Boyack still have brought the debate to the chamber today?

Does the member have any evidence whatsoever that the vote was not secure or solid, or is she just engaging in idle speculation and scaremongering?

Will the minister give way?

I will change what I was going to say and ask whether the cabinet secretary agrees that, in the vote to which Lewis Macdonald refers, a very small number of people voted in an insecure consultation process? That should be compared with the secure referendum that was backed by the independent returning officer.

How appropriate that McDonald number 2 follows Macdonald number 1, although I am not sure that I appreciate being referred to as a number 2, but there we go. I found the referendum in Aberdeen to be helpful for two reasons. First, it helped to give an indication of public support for the project, which the Government stipulated as necessary in its recommendations on how Aberdeen could secure tax increment financing funding. Secondly, the process has given the Labour Party welcome practice at being on the losing side in a referendum, which I am sure will come in handy for it in 2014.

No—don’t be silly. I will address some of the concerns—I will be generous and call them that—that Lewis Macdonald and Sarah Boyack have raised by reading some quotations. The first is from Crawford Langley, the independent counting officer, in whom I have a great deal of trust and faith, as I have worked alongside him at a number of elections and seen his work. He said: “The decision to run a postal ballot was largely taken before I was appointed as Counting Officer, but, as a professional electoral administrator with close on 40 years experience, I would not have accepted the appointment had I been asked to conduct it on any other basis. Make no mistake: any other form of ballot would have been substantially open to fraud.” The Labour Party’s insinuation that the process was somehow not secure flies in the face of Crawford Langley’s comments. Sarah Boyack suggested that we all need to read Mr Langley’s statement—I have read it and I agree that consideration needs to be given to what happens with local referenda in the future. However, the Labour Party motion makes not one reference to that concept. We could have had an interesting debate on the concept of local referenda and how to perhaps put in place a framework for them. Instead, we have a motion that Lewis Macdonald has helpfully brought to the Parliament to try to assist his colleagues in Aberdeen City Council in their attempts to win the council election in May. It is unfortunate that parliamentary time is being used for that purpose when the issue rightly belongs in the chamber of Aberdeen City Council and on the doorsteps of the city of Aberdeen. I have a couple more quotations that might lead to sober reflection among the Labour Party. One states: “The people of our historic city have voted in a democratic referendum. It is now time for Sir Ian Wood, ACSEF and the city council to return the trust shown in them. I implore all those involved with the City Garden to deliver on their promise of an on budget, sympathetic transformational project. I wish all those involved well.” That was Jimmy Milne, chairman of the Balmoral Group, in the Aberdeen Press and Journal on 7 March 2012. That is significant because Jimmy Milne opposed the city garden project, but he recognises the result of the referendum and the will of the people of Aberdeen to move forward with the project. It is a great pity that Lewis Macdonald cannot recognise the will of the people. A final quotation is from Scott Begbie, a columnist in the Evening Express. Again, he was an opponent of the project in advance of the referendum, but he said: “The campaign was hard fought by both sides, the people voted as they saw fit and the die is cast. What happens now is the real test of Aberdeen as a city. A grown-up, mature society would agree to disagree and accept the majority opinion.” It is clear that the Labour Party in the city of Aberdeen is not grown up or mature—it says no to the city garden project despite the public support; it said no to the Marischal college project, despite the fact that the scheme was delivered £22 million under budget by an SNP administration; it said no to the third Don crossing, which would solve congestion in the city; and it said no to the community stadium, which would help with the regeneration of our city. In May, the citizens of Aberdeen will be perfectly entitled to say no to the dinosaurs of the Labour Party.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will Sarah Boyack give way?

Will Sarah Boyack give way?

1. To ask the Scottish Government when the commission on the delivery of rural education will report its findings to ministers. (S4O-00769)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that Aberdeenshire Council is in the process of consulting widely on the future of its school estate. Does he anticipate that the commission will publish interim findings, which might provide a helpful indication to policy makers, practitioners and parents of its likely final recommendations?

Over the Christmas period I visited the Bethany Christian Trust winter shelter that operates in Aberdeen. The co-ordinators of the shelter were keen to comment that the number of people using the shelter had reduced significantly and they pinpointed the work being done by Aberdeen City Council, which has now implemented a prevention team on homelessness, as a key factor in that. Does the minister welcome the 56 per cent reduction in homelessness applications in Aberdeen for the period April to September compared with that of the previous year? Does he agree that that is testimony to the fine work of the prevention team and that other local authorities should consider implementing such a team?

The referendum on the city garden project is taking place in Aberdeen. I have cast my vote for the project but we will see what the people of Aberdeen decide at the end of the day. As well as the creative arts centre in the city garden project, funding for the art gallery is included in the tax incremental financing business case. Following the outcome of the referendum, will the minister meet me and other interested colleagues to discuss how we move forward, depending on the outcome of the referendum?

A number of councils have established arm’s-length organisations. Those organisations deliver council services but the staff are not directly employed by the council. Did the committee consider during its inquiry how those staff would be affected?

I welcome the committee’s inquiry, its report and today’s debate. The tone of the debate thus far has been broadly consensual, with a notable exception. As I listened to Margaret Mitchell’s speech, I felt as if we had gone into a time warp and that we were back debating the minimum wage all over again. The impacts that she talked about are the very ones that we were warned would follow the introduction of the minimum wage but, lo and behold, the minimum wage was introduced and the sky did not fall in, the lights did not go out and the position of those at the lower end of the pay scale was advanced. I remember having a part-time job that involved me spending one and a half hours’ worth of pay simply to get the bus to and from my job. Such situations were addressed by the minimum wage, which guaranteed a minimum level of pay for workers. The minimum wage was an idea whose time had come, and that is now the case with the living wage. I welcome the work that the Scottish Government is doing to show leadership on the issue by implementing a living wage across Scottish Government departments. Obviously, it is not for Government to dictate to local authorities and the private sector how they establish their pay. If we had the ability to set a living wage in the same way that the UK Government has the ability to set a minimum wage, the Parliament could take that approach, but that approach is not open to us at the moment, so we must work with colleagues in the public and private sectors to ensure that a living wage is implemented.

Not at the moment. The inquiry is welcome, because it highlights some of the issues that exist, including the mindset issue and some of the practicalities. It would be fair to say that a great deal of progress has been made. As the minister highlighted, a majority of councils are actively implementing the living wage or are signed up to delivering it. That includes my council, Aberdeen City Council. As a result of the leadership that was shown by Kevin Stewart, who will sum up in the debate, we moved to a £6.92 wage for the lowest-paid people in the council; the current council leader, Callum McCaig, has indicated that there will be a move to the living wage of £7.20. That is welcome progress for the low paid. Margaret Mitchell talked about service delivery—I will happily give way if she wants to intervene on this point—forgetting that the services are delivered by the very people whom the living wage is introduced to assist and protect. It is those front-line workers who will benefit as a result of the living wage. I suspect that Margaret Mitchell has forgotten that one of the key costs of service delivery is the wages of the people in the public sector on whom we rely to deliver front-line services. John Wilson, who has a long track record of campaigning for the lowest paid in society, spoke with great authority on the subject. He was correct when, during an intervention, he highlighted the failure of successive UK Governments from 2001 to take action to implement a living wage, which could have been enshrined in legislation and could have applied across the board. That is something that the Scottish Government does not have the legislative power to do, although it can implement the living wage in its departments and it can encourage others to implement the living wage. The Government’s moves are a clear example of social justice in action, as opposed to inaction on social justice.

If the living wage is such a bad thing, why is the Conservative mayor of London such a key advocate of it? I do not agree with Boris Johnson on an awful lot, but he is taking the right approach to the living wage. Margaret Mitchell and her colleagues would do well to heed what he said about the matter, as quoted by Joe FitzPatrick. She talks about reductions and so on, but if we put more money into the economy by increasing people’s pay packets, business activity increases, because people are able to afford more goods and services. There is a positive knock-on effect on the economy. The committee’s convener was right to highlight the scaremongering from CBI Scotland, which did not have a shred of evidence to back up its position—it was simply harking back to the scaremongering that took place during debates about the minimum wage. I welcome the Labour Party’s apparent ability to see through that scaremongering. Would that it could see through the CBI’s scaremongering on other matters, such as the constitution—but we are getting there, and perhaps the Labour Party will join us and complete its journey. On procurement, I support efforts to address the issue and the work that the minister talked about. At question time, the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment said—if I picked him up correctly—that in discussions with the European Union the UK Government has not been minded to take on board the Scottish Government’s arguments for a living wage and community benefit clauses. That is regrettable and I hope that the UK Government will reflect on the wider benefits of the living wage, not just for local economies but for the national economy. I welcome the report and look forward to further progress on the living wage.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

I congratulate my colleague George Adam on securing the debate and declare an interest as a member of Aberdeen City Council. During my time on that council, I have served on its fair trade working group. The North East Scotland region, which I represent, has a strong story to tell about fair trade. Both its major cities—Aberdeen and Dundee—have achieved Fairtrade city status, and Ellon, Huntly, Inverurie and Montrose are towns in the north-east that have achieved Fairtrade town status. The University of Dundee and the University of Aberdeen have achieved Fairtrade university status, and a number of schools have achieved Fairtrade status, including Ellon academy, Montrose academy and some primary schools. There is a strong story to be told in the north-east about fair trade, and I welcome the work that has been done in those and other communities to try to advance the fair trade agenda. We often talk about Fairtrade cities and towns, but there can also be Fairtrade zones. I have visited Formartine, which encompasses the villages of Pitmedden, Tarves and Methlick. There, I visited the Fairtrade shop in Tarves. There is a lot of talk about clothing, food, wine, coffee and tea Fairtrade products, but I managed to purchase from that shop Fairtrade wrapping paper at Christmas time in which to wrap Christmas presents. A plethora of goods with the Fairtrade logo attached is now available. Although certain products may be more popularly associated with fair trade, it is important that we make people aware of how many different items they can now buy through the Fairtrade campaign. Individuals are working locally to drive campaigns. After I visited the Fairtrade shop in Formartine, I went to the home of Anne Aspden, who is a constituent of mine. She opens up her farmhouse in the village of Pitmedden once a year to sell Fairtrade products and provide fair trade baking, for example, to members of the public who want to go in for a while. The money that is raised goes towards good causes, which is commendable. We should recognise not only the efforts of collectives, but those of passionate individuals, who are often the driving force behind fair trade movements in particular areas. They deserve to be commended for their work. A number of events will take place to mark Fairtrade fortnight. Some individuals from Malawi are coming to the north-east. Mr Masauko Khembo—to whom I apologise profusely for probably having butchered the pronunciation of his name—who is the chief executive of the Kasinthula cane growers will be giving a talk in Stonehaven on 6 March. I will not be able to make it, but I encourage anyone in the area who is able to go along to do so and listen to the story that Mr Khembo has to tell about how fair trade affects him and other farmers in the third world. On 1 March, a Fairtrade producer from Malawi will visit Arbroath high school to give a presentation to secondary school pupils. Fairtrade schools are vital, because young people are often the driving force in this area, and school campaigns often lead to parents and other relatives getting involved in the Fairtrade movement. It is important to take outreach work into the schools. It is great that we are having this debate. A lot is being done in Scotland. Obviously, there is more to be done, and let us hope that we can take the steps that are necessary to join our Celtic cousin, Wales, in becoming a Fairtrade nation.

If the Labour Government was so interested in protecting procurement in Scotland, on how many occasions did it procure from outside Scotland?

In the context of the public health supplement on supermarkets, does Mr Henry accept that he and his colleagues contend that the minimum unit pricing of alcohol would inflate the profits of supermarkets? Either he is in favour of supermarkets making profits or he is not.

Like my colleague Kevin Stewart, I declare an interest as a member of Aberdeen City Council. I join him in welcoming the additional funding that will come to Aberdeen as a result of the 85 per cent floor, and I also welcome the money in the transport uplift, which will deliver money for the much-needed improvements at the Haudagain roundabout in Aberdeen. Those improvements are long awaited and very welcome. Yesterday was the 200th anniversary of the birth of Charles Dickens, and it is pleasing that the Opposition parties have chosen to pay such a warm tribute to him by arriving in the chamber and saying, “Please, Mr Swinney, we want some more.” However, it is not fair for them to hold out the begging bowl to ask for more from the cabinet secretary without giving him a constructive indication of how they would allocate money from other budgets. The simple fact is that, within a fixed budget, if money moves to increase one budget, another budget must be decreased. Coming to this chamber and assuming that they can ask for every budget under the sun to be uplifted while not telling us which budgets would have to be reduced is dishonest.

No, I would like to make some progress. Mr Macintosh had 11 minutes in which to give us some indication of what Labour members would do, and instead all we got from them was moaning and girning. Meanwhile, people outside who have engaged constructively with the Scottish Government welcome the improvements. Robin Parker, president of NUS Scotland, says: “I’m delighted to say that the Scottish Government has delivered to protect opportunities at this difficult time. We fully welcome their decision to reinstate the £11.4m into college bursaries, their commitment to protect places and local access, and we’ll work closely with colleges and government to closely monitor the quality colleges are able to offer over the coming year.” On the rest of the budget, Mr Parker goes on to say: “This Budget provides additional funding to universities, it keeps Scotland free of tuition fees, it protects the EMA, it begins to provide the money needed for a £7000 minimum income for the poorest higher education students and, following today’s debate, it now also provides the money we need for the poorest college students. This is all great news.” That is a direct quote from the president of NUS Scotland—[Interruption.] Jackie Baillie might want to disagree with the president of NUS Scotland, but I congratulate him and his colleagues, some of whom I met in advance of the budget, on their successful campaign. Richard Baker was very quick to talk about the situation at Aberdeen College. Well, one of the people I met, along with Kevin Stewart, was Lani Baird, the student president at Aberdeen College, who announced today on Twitter that she will be “CELEBRATING tonight!!! Well done to everyone involved in #ourfutureourfight WE DID IT!!!” She told me that she is so happy about the Scottish Government’s announcement. People who actually care about students are pleased with what this Government is delivering because they recognise that we care about them, too.

That is 10 seconds of my life that I will not see again. I wonder whether Mr Findlay, the class warrior in this Parliament, agrees with his colleague, Hugh Henry, about the public health supplement, given that he is obviously so keenly opposed to big businesses making exorbitant profits. I am sure that he will entirely support us on the public health supplement and the work that will be done in that regard. The Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning clearly stated that he would seek every possible opportunity to support students. He has done that, and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has delivered on it. I hope that Mr Findlay will welcome that and will vote tonight for the budget and all the measures that the cabinet secretary has announced. On capital investment, I particularly welcome the announcement on broadband for rural areas, which will benefit many of the communities in the north-east that I represent. I also welcome the boost for shared equity housing. Many of the people I meet as a councillor and as an MSP are on the housing lists because they cannot afford to make the step towards becoming a first-time buyer, and shared equity schemes will help some of them to access affordable housing. I very much welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement in that regard. I am not the only person to welcome these announcements, because another person outside this chamber has said of the announcements on infrastructure: “We welcome the broad tone of the Scottish budget within this context and in particular we welcome the additional funds that the Government have identified for investment in capital infrastructure. This is a sensible use of resources that will bring long term dividends for the Scottish economy, especially in terms of the investment in broadband connectivity, transport and housing.” That comes from Liz Cameron, chief executive of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce. So, the people who speak for student and business organisations are welcoming what we are doing; the only people who seem to have a problem with it are Labour members who propose that they are the mouthpieces of those organisations. On Aberdeen City Council, I am used to Labour Party chicanery on budgets and to its failure to produce an alternative budget at any time. I thought that, perhaps, at a more strategic, national level, we might get a little bit more thought and focus. I am sure that Jackie Baillie welcomes preventative spending and early intervention but, if she votes against them tonight as part of the budget, that will be a hollow welcome and the cry from Labour will be, “What do we want? Early intervention. When do we want it? Later.”

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member not at least have the grace to join NUS Scotland in welcoming what the Government is doing? NUS Scotland welcomes it; why can the member not welcome it?

I am grateful that the cabinet secretary has outlined the implications for Scotland of not drawing down that end-year flexibility. Does he agree that, if he had not drawn down that money before the abolition of end-year flexibility, it would have been quite catastrophic for the Scottish economy? Does the fact that he is being asked such questions by Labour Party members not demonstrate that they still do not get it?

I direct members to my declaration of interests in respect of my membership of Aberdeen City Council—that might pop up during my speech. My colleagues from the north-east, Kevin Stewart and Dennis Robertson, will speak later in the debate, so I will do what I can do to highlight positive examples from the north-east without engaging in thunder stealing. With that in mind, I briefly mention Huntly, which is in Mr Robertson’s constituency. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments about the town, which is an exemplar in its use of the arts to rebrand itself and become an internationally recognised creative community. Other small communities should emulate the approach. There are plans to use the funding award for a number of exciting projects, including a creative food project. We might hear more about that later. There is a lot to be excited about in Huntly. During the year of creative Scotland a number of projects will run in Aberdeen. Aberdeen international youth festival is celebrating its 40th anniversary this year. The event has become a leading youth arts festival and one of the most popular festivals in Scotland. About 1,000 talented young people from performing arts companies and music groups across the globe will arrive in Aberdeen to perform at venues large and small, from Aberdeen music hall to the church hall at Queen’s Cross. The festival will include some outreach events in Aberdeenshire. Indeed, such events have become a festival favourite and recognise not only the city’s hosting of the festival but the city region’s role in the area’s cultural fabric. They are all about reaching out to certain communities who might not find it as easy to get into Aberdeen and enjoy the festival. Aberdeen’s hosting of the British science festival, which promotes the best of knowledge and learning in science, technology and the arts, will play a fundamental part in its contribution to the 2012 year of creative Scotland. The impact of the Olympics has already been mentioned and an Olympic torch relay event in Aberdeenshire will involve a mixture of dance, music and the arts and include a performance by the chart-topping Aberdeenshire artist Emeli Sandé and a participatory dance event. Aberdeen’s own public Olympic art commission will also be playing a firm role in that. Another event called “The Port” is a multi-arts collaboration that seeks to connect young people and their wider communities with the changing landscape of Aberdeen city and harbour and will use street performances, large sculptural pieces, dance and music opportunities to develop high-quality local experiences. Although such events are not on the grand scale of some that have been mentioned, they nevertheless play a very important role. In an example of the kind of shameless parochiality that I engage in from time to time in the chamber, I want to talk about certain things that might not be directly linked to the year of creative Scotland but which tie in with the sort of community involvement issues that Patricia Ferguson mentioned. A number of play areas in the village of Dyce where I live and which I represent on Aberdeen City Council had fallen into a bad way, but they have since been reinvigorated partly through the installation of art pieces. For example, kids’ sculptures were placed in Central park to give it a more cultural feel. A Sluie Drive park that had fallen into a very bad state of repair was reinvigorated with artworks developed with some of the young children at Dyce play group, who were, as a result, given a real sense of ownership. Moreover, play areas off Princess Drive that had fallen into serious disrepair are now home to some fantastic ground-level street art that has really enhanced interest in the area. It is worth mentioning such projects, because they have a role to play in community regeneration and in meeting the year of creative Scotland’s aim of exploring Scotland’s culture. This is not just about art in the community; all the projects that I have highlighted involved young people in the community, giving them a sense of ownership and helping communities to feel that the project was theirs and not just something that was imposed on them. I was extremely enthused by a recent project involving a collaboration between the National Theatre of Scotland and my old school Dyce academy that resulted in a piece called “The Cabaret of Impossible Dreams”, which was performed at the Forum in Aberdeen. It brought in puppetry, music, mime and dance but the best thing about it was not only that it was created in collaboration with more than 120 school students, but that it brought in the local community to work alongside them and helped to create links that will continue beyond that performance. That kind of community-based art should really be promoted. Although it might not attract the kind of headlines that the Edinburgh military tattoo or major festivals such as the Edinburgh fringe attract, that does not make it any less of a vital part of Scotland’s cultural fabric. It can act as a stepping stone for young people and communities that might not engage in cultural activity to feel a part of it and perhaps to move on and discover other things.

Does the member agree that art can also deter youth crime? I cite the example of Northfield in Aberdeen, where young people painted the shutters of shops. That has reduced the amount of graffiti and other forms of vandalism in the area quite dramatically.

Will the member take an intervention?

Imagine the restrictions that a fixed budget puts in place. Imagine having to deal with a fixed budget that one cannot increase or grow—just imagine that. [Interruption.] Presiding Officer, I am having a bit of trouble getting on with my speech while members are attempting to instigate a conversation with me.

The minister, rightly, has called for an emphasis on innovation. Yesterday, while other members were discussing matters here, I was at a full council meeting of Aberdeen City Council at which the council agreed unanimously to proceed with a hydrogen bus project. Its delivery is contingent on agreement with partners, but the council has nailed its colours to the mast on that and is looking to progress with a move that could release a number of hydrogen buses into the Aberdeen bus fleet. They would create zero carbon emissions; therefore, that is an important step forward and the kind of innovation that the minister talked about.

I am always interested in best practice from other areas. I am, however, not familiar with the scheme that the member highlights, so I cannot give her any firm commitment on that. Also, the decision does not rest with me. On the bus service operators grant, the minister has rightly highlighted the fact that, where subsidy is provided, it must follow the passenger. Too often, it has not done that, but the changes that the minister has identified will mean that that will happen. As has been identified in the debate, passengers in rural areas should be a priority given the specific pressures that rural areas face, such as high fuel costs and the distances that people are required to travel to access services. The change to the bus service operators grant will mean that funding is targeted more at rural services, which are in need of that assistance, as are rural communities. That is important.

I do not have time. The managing director of FirstBus said in the Evening Express yesterday that the reason that FirstBus is hiking its fares by 8 per cent is entirely down to changes to the bus service operators grant. FirstBus—a multibillion-pound multinational corporation—has a bit of a cheek if it is claiming that the only way in which it can run a viable bus service is with Government subsidy.

No, I do not have the time. I welcome the clarity on the bus pass that there now seems to be. I simply note that whenever the Government has considered the bus pass, usually with a view to extending its provision, Labour members have run to the communities howling that we are going to take away folks’ bus passes. It is a little rich for Labour members to turn around and say that the Government should perhaps consider taking away folks’ bus passes when that is the scaremongering that they have used in communities during previous reviews.

I am in my last 30 seconds. I will make the point to Alex Johnstone on why I think that universality on the bus pass is important. In rural areas, people who might not qualify for a bus pass under a means-tested system often use the bus pass to access a route that would cease to be viable without the subsidy that the bus pass provides. If changes were made, the people who access the route without a bus pass could lose that service. That is an important consideration: what would be the impact of changes on bus services, many of which are dependent on bus pass users to keep them viable, and what would be the impact on the communities that lose such a service? There is much that we need to look at in discussing the bus system in Scotland. The minister has identified key areas for consideration, and I think that we should move forward on that basis.

Will the member give way?

Will Richard Baker give way?

No one in the chamber would argue that the current situation is perfect in any way. We accept that a lot remains to be done. I speak as a member of Aberdeen City Council, which is one of the local authorities that does not yet deliver 100 per cent equivalence with foster carers. We have expressed an aspiration to achieve that, but I readily accept that we are not yet at that stage, and I accept what Jackie Baillie has contended: performance is mixed in Scotland’s local authorities. However, it is the case that the four poorest-performing local authorities in terms of the amount that they pay are controlled by her party. If she is going to come here and make some sort of virtue of her and the Labour Party’s concern for kinship carers, she should also speak to the leaders of South Lanarkshire Council, Glasgow City Council, Falkirk Council and East Dunbartonshire Council, which are all paying £40 or less to their kinship carers.

I am not going to take Ms Marra’s intervention. I have only four minutes to get through what I want to say. It is not an excuse or a deflection to make the point that there are degrees of accountability and responsibility on the issue. Degrees of responsibility and accountability are held at UK level, at Scottish Government level and at local government level. It is stretching the limits of credibility—Jackie Baillie is well used to doing that—to suggest that Mike Russell’s memo somehow says, “Job done. Now forget about it.” It says no such thing. Jackie Baillie might want to put that spin on it, but that is not what the letter says in any way, shape or form. SNP members are often told that we attach too many strings to the funding that we give local authorities and that we put too many handcuffs on local government, but we are also told in relation to issues such as kinship care and the funding that is given to COSLA that we give local authorities too much freedom to decide their priorities. A little bit of consistency on that would go a long way. The minster has rightly argued that, although the payments issue is important—I do not seek to detract from that in any way, shape or form—it is not the only aspect of the kinship care agenda. One key thing that the Government did when it took power in 2007 was give kinship carers the recognition that they previously lacked, which opened up other support mechanisms for them. For example, the kinds of advice and support that were readily given to foster carers or unpaid carers but were not available to the same extent for kinship carers are now available through organisations such as Children 1st and the citizens advice bureaux. I reiterate that I do not think that any member would stand up and argue that it is mission accomplished in the kinship care agenda. That matter has been raised previously in this session. I think that Michael Matheson pointed out during the carers strategy debate that we agree that kinship care still requires a deal of work to be done. In concluding, I simply pose two questions. First, has a lot been done? Yes, it has. Secondly, is there more to be done? Yes, there is. We all have a role to play in that, and I hope that we will play our roles constructively and consensually.

Does Nanette Milne accept that the concerns are being expressed not only by the Government, but by a number of organisations and charities that work with care groups and individuals who receive care?

The First Minister will be familiar with Sangs of Macduff from his time representing Banff and Buchan. Does he share the concerns that are being expressed regarding the conduct of Allied Irish Banks in placing the firm in administration, in spite of the insistence of the owner in Wednesday’s Press and Journal that there is no cash-flow problem and nor has the company ever defaulted on a loan or supplier payment? Can he advise me of whether the Scottish Government has contacted the administrator and AIB to ascertain what has occurred and to ensure that the future of the business is secured?

I draw the minister’s attention to the situation at Insch station in Aberdeenshire, where northbound trains have to stop at the platform opposite the village because of restrictions that are caused by the single track. Consequently, passengers with mobility issues or prams and pushchairs have to cross the footbridge to access the village. Will the minister meet me and local councillor Allison Grant to discuss the matter and to see whether a solution can be found?

I agree with what the member says. He may not be aware that Aberdeen City Council officials are in Ghana speaking to businesses that have moved from the north-east to see whether the infrastructure that is in place in Aberdeen can be repeated in Ghana following the boom in the offshore sector there. We can learn a lot from cities elsewhere, but our cities can also project a lot to the world in terms of best practice and lessons that we can pass on from our experiences.

I congratulate my colleague Joan McAlpine on securing this extremely important debate on a vital issue that relates to the cultural fabric of Scotland. Scotland’s music has a strong international reputation, not just because of our folk music, but because of major international artists, from Annie Lennox to Franz Ferdinand and Amy Macdonald, who have found success beyond these shores and in charts throughout the world. A concerning feature of the BBC proposals is the effect on opportunities for new and up-and-coming artists, who sometimes need a leg-up to make themselves known to the industry, which all too often is very focused on existing major acts and less so on up-and-coming ones. Such acts might need a bit of cultivation and assistance to make the breakthrough, and shows such as “Introducing in Scotland” are vital for that. When I was at university in Aberdeen and not long after that, there was a furore because the local radio station Radio Northsound had dropped its hour-long session in which it played music from local bands. If a local band produced an EP, its songs could be played on the show, which would give them exposure to the wider public in the north-east who perhaps did not go to the gigs that took place in the evenings. When that slot went, the argument was that, if those bands wanted to get exposure, most of them would have to leave Aberdeen to cultivate their reputations in the Glasgow music scene, which often drew bands away from Aberdeen. I do not have a problem with artists leaving the area in which they started to make a success of themselves, but that should be out of choice, not necessity and starvation of opportunity. That is the concern that I have in relation to “Introducing in Scotland”. I was struck by the parallel that exists between the two cases. The further we force people to go to gain recognition, the more difficult we make it for them to make a breakthrough. Bands that previously would have gone from Aberdeen and the north-east to the Glasgow music scene to make their name and cultivate a reputation—and which might have got a leg-up through “Introducing in Scotland” being broadcast from Glasgow—now might think that, to make the breakthrough, they will have to go to the London music scene. To be perfectly honest, it is much more difficult for a band to make its name and cultivate a reputation in London, because London attracts people from throughout the UK, whereas in Scotland we have a smaller population and therefore, by definition, fewer bands than there are at a pan-UK level. A number of Aberdeen bands have gone on to make a modest success of themselves and gain a strong reputation. The punk band The Xcerts gained a number of important support and festival slots having started playing in local clubs in Aberdeen. Another band, Driveblind, went to the United States to make a success of themselves. Bands like that, who left after making a reputation for themselves, might now find themselves having to leave to make their reputation if we lose such opportunities for them. I call on the BBC to look at what it is doing and to think about the impact that its decision is likely to have on cultural output from nations such as Scotland. Let us not forget Wales and Northern Ireland, which are just as important to this issue. We should unite in solidarity with the campaigners in those nations who are trying to save their local opt-out and the opportunities that it provides to their local artists. Hopefully, a united campaign, as is being fought, and as Joan McAlpine has highlighted tonight, will be successful. I call on the BBC to reverse its decision.

I accept the member’s contention, but does she not accept that musicians need first to develop local and national exposure before they can go on to achieve wider exposure and that removing the steps that allow them to achieve that is counterproductive?

Mr McLetchie seems concerned that Irish voters who might be more naturally disposed to independence will have a vote in the referendum. Some of those Irish voters might vote for centre-right political parties in Ireland and then move over here, but I do not object to their having the franchise for Scottish Parliament elections on the basis that they might then vote for the Tories.

I congratulate Elaine Murray on bringing the debate to the chamber. As she might have guessed, I do not agree with the position that she and Mr Wallace take on this matter. I have to be honest and say gently to Mr McLetchie that he has to be careful about how he frames the notion of people who were not born in Scotland having a vote in the referendum, because he seemed to suggest that some special criteria were being used. That is not the case. The people he referred to are entitled to vote in the elections to this Parliament, so they have a right to a vote on the future of this nation. They have chosen to come to Scotland and to make it their home, and they demonstrate that they are willing to participate in the future of this nation. As our departed but never forgotten colleague Bashir Ahmad quite rightly said, “It isn’t important where you come from; what matters is where we are going together as a nation.” That is the important element to this debate. With regard to the issues around residency and who should vote, Jamie Hepburn has made the point that, in other referenda—such as the devolution referendum in 1997, the recent referendum in Wales on the extension of powers to the Welsh Assembly and the recent independence referendum in Montenegro—residency was the criterion that was used, not place of birth. Jamie Hepburn rightly raised the issue of how we define and capture the Scottish expat. At the moment, no one has Scottish citizenship; we have British citizenship. Expats are allowed to vote in UK-wide elections because British citizenship is a legally defined term. Elaine Murray’s motion and Mr Wallace’s campaign ask us to establish some quasi-legal criterion of Scottish citizenship or Scottish expat status to entitle those people to vote in Scottish elections.

I think that Elaine Murray has introduced an even stranger burden of proof. Initially, she spoke of expats as being people who were born in Scotland, but she is now talking about people who have spent some time living in Scotland at some point in the past 15 years. Now we will have to find proof of people’s address and so on, adding an even greater burden to the process. I am disappointed that we are talking about the extension of the franchise in a way that I do not think is necessarily logical. If someone leaves Scotland at the age of three and is resident outside Scotland for 15 years, under Elaine Murray’s criteria, they would be entitled to a vote—

If they chose to register.

I am sorry if I have taken the member’s point wrongly. However, I still do not see why we are talking about extending the franchise to people who live outwith our borders and not to those who live within our borders, who contribute to society through taxation, employment and so on. Why should my aunt and uncle, who left Scotland for Canada many years ago, be entitled to a vote in this referendum, but not my cousin, who will be 16 and perhaps in employment at the time of the referendum? I believe that we are having the wrong argument today. If we are going to extend the franchise, we should be extending it to include those who are aged 16 and 17, who live in Scotland, who contribute to the future of Scotland and who will, I hope, continue to play a valuable role in the future of Scotland. I apologise for the misunderstanding that clearly arose, but I do not think that that in any way diminishes the fact that the proposal would result in a process that would be extremely difficult for the Scottish Government to administer and would require great leaps of logic in many areas. We would do far better to focus our efforts on extending the franchise to 16 and 17-year-olds than to extend it those who might not have known Scotland as their home for a very long time.

On 18 October 2010, Labour MPs voted to give 16 and 17-year-olds the right to vote in the alternative vote referendum. Does Johann Lamont believe that 16 and 17-year-olds should have the right to vote in the Scottish independence referendum?

Will the member give way on that point?

Willie Rennie seems interested in what members on this side of the chamber did about the claim of right. I can clear that up for him: I was nine when the claim of right was signed, so I was slightly more interested in playing with Lego than in signing it. [Interruption.] I realise that Jackie Baillie’s first words might have been “social justice”, but some of us had a childhood before we became interested in politics. Johann Lamont stated that this is the only time and the only issue on which she has agreed with the Tories—apart from trams, minimum pricing, the supermarket levy, the Iraq war, the graduate endowment and the bill on offensive behaviour. Apart from all those things, this is the only issue on which she has ever agreed with the Conservative Party. The Labour Party has brought us a debate with the headline, “Scotland’s Future”, so let us refer to Scotland’s future and to Scotland’s young people. The Scottish National Party’s policy is that every 16 and 17-year-old should be entitled to vote in all elections. As the First Minister rightly identified, we do not currently hold the powers in the Parliament to enact that policy. However, if we have the powers here, members can rest assured that those young people will vote in every election that this Government has the opportunity to allow them to vote in.

No. My colleague Kevin Stewart has been invited to be a champion of the votes at 16 campaign, but he is not the only politician who has agreed with that campaign. Indeed, Pamela Nash—the MP for Airdrie, Shotts and surrounding villages, tweeted on 18 October 2010 that she had “Just voted for Votes at 16, unfortunately 346 MPs disagreed with me”. I was also struck by a quotation that I came across from 9 June 2011: “A chance to have a say in who represents them at a local and national level and in making decisions that will affect their lives now and in the future would benefit both of these groups in a ground-breaking way by opening up debates, fostering civic awareness and encouraging political involvement at all levels.” That was John Park MSP supporting the votes at 16 campaign. When those politicians are given the opportunity categorically to back 16 and 17-year-olds having the vote on an important issue for their and their country’s future, they fall silent and into the realms of saying nothing. They are less champions for votes at 16 and more chumps for votes at 16. Let us touch on the issue of business uncertainty. The challenge has been laid at the door of the unionist parties to name one business—just one—that has stated that independence and the referendum have dissuaded it from investing in Scotland. They cannot do it. They throw up the notion that somehow that is because the discussions are confidential and therefore they cannot possibly give away the details. They can give away the content of the discussions; they just cannot give away who the discussions were with. It is time for that nonsense to stop. On the issue of timing, I will listen to experts on constitutional affairs, such as Stephen Tierney, professor of constitutional affairs at the University of Edinburgh. He said: “one of the standard democratic criticisms of referendums held throughout the world is that they’re rushed ... it’s fairly strange that a referendum should be criticised because it’s too far away.” I will listen to Stephen Tierney and his lessons on the timing of a referendum before I listen to the lessons of the UK parties. I find particularly interesting the notion that we are somehow being inconsistent on the second question. Let us be as clear as we possibly can—and I agree entirely with the Deputy First Minister on this. Our absolute preference is for an independence question, and I will campaign for independence because that is what I believe in. However, I recognise—we as a party recognise—that there is a body of opinion in civic Scotland, of which Malcolm Chisholm is part, that believes that there should be a focus on other powers below independence.

Just one second—let me develop the point. Those people would call for this Parliament and this Government to put forward a question that offers the opportunity for further devolution short of independence. I do not believe that we, as politicians, should shut down that debate today and say simply that we should not countenance it. I hope that Lewis Macdonald will agree with me on that.

Lewis Macdonald should be patient: in two weeks’ time, the consultation document will be published and we will consult and discuss with civic Scotland. We will do that anyway. We did not need a Labour motion to tell us to do what we were going to do already. Lewis Macdonald may also want to have a word with some of his colleagues at Westminster, such as Anas Sarwar, who seem to want to shut down the discussion to be simply about one question on the ballot paper. Let us be clear that the Scottish National Party’s firm preference is for a question on independence, but we recognise the body of opinion that may wish to see a further option. On the point of uncertainty, let us consider the position of the Scottish secretary. We were told that he never stands in the way of anything and is consistent in his approach. First, he did not want a referendum; then he wanted two of them as quickly as possible; then, 24 hours later, it was back to just one, but he always wanted more powers, but not if it had to be put to the vote in a referendum; then he decided that he wanted to set a timescale for the referendum; 24 hours later he did not; and another 24 hours later he was going to consult on the timescale that he did not want to set. However, we are told that all the uncertainty is the fault of everybody else, not Michael Moore. Frankly, it is the biggest example of the constitutional hokey-cokey that I have ever seen in my life. This Government has the mandate and the right to put the question to the people of Scotland. Let us get on with it.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Further to the recent comments regarding courtesy to members, will you reflect on whether accusing another member of racism, regardless of the context, is in order in the chamber?

Will the member give way?

Shame!

This is January, when the time that people’s pay has to last is extended because they were paid early in December. I have a motion on an early January pay date for which I hope to secure a members’ business debate. However, does Margaret Burgess agree that moving the January pay date would particularly help low-income families who have to make the December pay last for six weeks?

First, I apologise for arriving slightly late in the chamber. I intended no discourtesy either to the Presiding Officers or to the chamber and will endeavour not to be late again. I wish to make what I stress is not a partisan point about support staff, who have been mentioned a couple of times. Looked-after children have been failed by society for a very long time now, including during periods when there were huge numbers of support staff, and I caution members against simply equating more support staff with better outcomes for looked-after children. The situation is much more complex than that.

I understand that that was not the point that Mr Findlay was trying to make—

I am not taking an intervention at this point. As I said, I understand that that was not necessarily the point that the member was making. Nevertheless, I suggest that we ensure that such an equation is not what comes out of this debate. At this point, I should declare an interest; like Kevin Stewart, I am a member of Aberdeen City Council. Indeed, as a result, I have learned the hard way that people who speak after Mr Stewart tend to find that all the good material has gone when they get up to make their speech. Luckily, I am flexible and will do my best to come up with some stuff for the committee. Although, as the convener rightly said, the debate is about trying to find answers from members in the chamber, I think that he might well get constructive suggestions instead. After all, the issue is too difficult for any of us to claim that we have some kind of silver bullet answer or range of answers to it. We certainly need to consider the question of achievement versus attainment, because narrowing the focus to attainment might exclude those who are not academically inclined. I am not suggesting that there are not looked-after children who are academically inclined, but the figures seem to indicate that looking at achievement might be a way of broadening and improving looked-after children’s experience of the education system. Focusing on activities other than purely academic ones might be beneficial for the children concerned and more widely. Exclusions are worth looking at, too. I question whether exclusion is the appropriate approach to take, particularly with looked-after children. The figures make for fairly sober reading. Aberdeen City Council has a figure of 627 exclusions per 1,000 looked-after pupils, compared with a national figure of 365 per 1,000 looked-after pupils. The figure for Argyll and Bute Council is 417 and that for Dundee City Council is 525. One figure leaped out at me—that for South Ayrshire Council, where the number of looked-after children is 31 and the total number of exclusions of looked-after children is 28. South Ayrshire Council is the only local authority that I managed to find—I did not look at figures for every local authority—where the number of exclusions of looked-after children is lower than the total number of looked-after children. Crucially, South Ayrshire’s figure for the number of exclusions per 1,000 looked-after pupils is 161, which is less than half the national level. What is being done in South Ayrshire? Is a different approach being taken that is leading to those figures? The committee might want to consider looking at that in more detail. I do not have the answer before me, but South Ayrshire’s figures leaped off the page as being different from and standing out against the national picture. A closer look at arrangements there might be beneficial. Opportunities are also worth considering. Educational attainment or experience is one thing, but we need to consider what happens after that. Kevin Stewart quite rightly mentioned the family firm approach that is being taken in Aberdeen and the apprenticeships and internships that are being offered by businesses and the council itself. He was correct in what he said about positive discrimination. Given the negative experiences that looked-after children face throughout their childhood, being positive in giving them a helping hand is entirely justified, both in our role as corporate parents and generally, from a moral point of view.

I take that point entirely. I used the term “positive discrimination” to refer to the member’s point about the manner in which it had been used to him. I do not know whether the committee has considered this, but I suggest that it should talk to the young people themselves. One of the most powerful and hard-hitting things that I experienced as an elected member was watching a talking-heads DVD that had been put together by the social work department at Aberdeen City Council. It featured children who were being looked after in a care setting, who gave their views on and experiences of the care setting in general, the corporate parenting that they received and their lives as a whole. It would be helpful to ask such children how they view the education system and what they see as their challenges. Talking to organisations that deal with looked-after young people is absolutely fine, but there is no substitute for first-person testimony. I actively encourage the committee to consider talking to a sample of looked-after children or former looked-after children about their experiences in order to inform its work.

I welcome the report as the new boy on the committee, although I am soon to be joined by other new members, so I will not be the newest member for long. It is not necessarily fair for me to comment on the process behind the production of the report, other than to remark that the fairly comprehensive list of witnesses and evidence sessions at annex A indicates that the committee undertook a great deal of scrutiny during the course of producing the report. Paragraphs 5 and 6 of the report make it clear that this is a challenging economic climate and that the Government is facing a challenging settlement. Paragraph 5 states that the budget will decrease by 12.3 per cent in real terms over the course of the spending review, with a 7 per cent reduction coming in this year alone. That makes this financial year extremely challenging. Even those who are wedded to a particular political ideology or a particular direction of political travel would accept the financial challenges that the Scottish Government is facing. It is clear that, in these challenging times and within that difficult settlement, there need to be clear statements of priority from the Government. I welcome the fact that three clear priorities are being set: the acceleration of economic recovery and the creation of jobs through the low-carbon economy; public sector reform, with a dramatic shift to preventative spend; and the introduction of a social wage. I will focus my remarks on the preventative spend agenda. The agenda that the Scottish Government is pursuing represents one of the biggest changes—if not the biggest—in the mindsets and agendas of Governments in my lifetime, which I realise has not been very long. In my time in politics, as a local councillor or working within the political system, I have always been frustrated by the short-termism that often dominates the political agenda and ignores the longer-term picture. The cabinet secretary has recognised that point in his shift towards preventative spend, which takes a longer-term view of the situation. It is important to recognise the need to involve third sector partners in the shift to preventative spend, given their role in the agenda. The recommendations in paragraph 135 of the report are welcome in that regard, because they recognise the need to set the third sector in its rightful place as a key partner in the move to preventative spend. Some concerns were raised during the course of the evidence sessions about the amount of money being directed towards preventative spend over the course of the spending review. In that regard, I will make three observations. First, given that we have a fixed budget that is under increasing pressure from outside influences that this Parliament cannot control, I do not think that £500 million over the period is an insignificant sum to direct towards a preventative spend agenda and a change in focus. Secondly, that £500 million is the direct allocation from central Government. Other budgets are controlled at local level by local authorities, NHS boards and other public bodies and it is up to them to prioritise within their own budget settlement how they want the preventative spend agenda to operate locally. It will be interesting to see how that develops and I am sure that the cabinet secretary and his colleague, the newly appointed Minister for Local Government and Planning, will have key discussions with those bodies, particularly local government partners, on how they deliver this agenda in their areas. In fact, there has been something of a transition to preventative spend in some places. For example, Aberdeen City Council has made efforts to redesign services and remodel them into a more preventative and early intervention approach. That mindset would be welcomed in other local authority areas; indeed, I am sure that members across the chamber will be able to highlight examples from their own areas. Thirdly, I contend that the preventative spend agenda is just as much about the mindset as it is about the money. The redirection of resources and redesign of services can unlock significant savings and deliver real benefits to the public. If every pound spent on intervention can save many tens of pounds in other areas, that is simply a no-brainer to me. It unlocks potential resources not necessarily in the first year but in future years for reinvestment in and allocation to other areas. I find it unfortunate that the Labour Party rejected the entire report in committee and I hope that its members will pause for thought and vote in favour of the motion tonight. It is the time of year when individuals can be visited by three spirits that attempt to show them the error of their ways. I know that the Labour Party had its Christmas party last night; I have no idea whether Mr Macintosh was visited by three spirits but I hope that he will consider changing his party’s stance on this report to a more constructive one. This robust report scrutinises in considerable detail the Scottish Government’s budget. I welcome its conclusions and await the cabinet secretary’s considered response.

Does Mr Rennie accept that his efforts might also be worth while in persuading his colleague, Danny Alexander, to reverse his cuts to this Government’s budget?

Does Mr Harvie accept that, as we move towards low-carbon transport, it will need roads on which to travel?

Obviously, the processing sector and markets rely on a continuity of supply in order to make their businesses viable. Can the cabinet secretary assure us that he will have discussions to ensure that the reduced days at sea are staggered in such a way that that continuity is not affected, which would have a detrimental impact on the processing sector and the markets?

It was all going so well! Before I was elected, I used to coach school debating teams. The kids used to say to me, “I want to turn up at the debate with a pre-written speech.” I offered them two pieces of advice. The first was, “Don’t.” The second was, “If you do, be flexible enough to change the tone of your speech if the tone of the debate does not match what you prepared for.” I now extend that advice to Mary Fee. The submission from the Association of Directors of Social Work was unfortunate. The message that we should send back to the ADSW is that the proposals represent an opportunity, not a threat, and that it can work with us to deliver an integrated service. I hope that it will choose to do so. I welcome the framework’s focus on outcomes. All too often, in politics in general, we get hung up on input measures. I have an example of that from my experience as a councillor in Aberdeen. The learning disability budgets there were focused on what was spent on the packages, and people were being provided with very expensive packages of support that were not necessarily appropriate to their needs. Indeed, it was pointed out to us that if Birmingham City Council, which had a learning disability budget of £50 million, had spent the same amount per head as Aberdeen City Council was doing, its budget would have been £85 million. The crucial factor, however, was that the outcomes were not up to standard. Change and reform were therefore necessary. We must ensure that we reform and transform services.

Indeed I do. The third sector will have a crucial role to play in the integration of social care and health, and I shall say more about that later. I have said before that it is incumbent on us to highlight best practice where it exists and bring examples of it to the chamber. It is all very well for us to talk about what is going wrong and what could be done better—we might hear more of that later—but we also have a duty to highlight examples of good practice. I have spoken here in the past about Rosewell house and Smithfield court in Aberdeen. They are good examples of places in which the health service and the social care department are working closely together to deliver services for elderly people. Another example of good practice in Aberdeenshire is the Old Mart community resource centre in Maud, which provides a multi-agency support network involving health, council and third sector services. A range of services is delivered by health visitors, community nurses, physiotherapists, mental health teams and home care support, and the GP practice delivers a twice-weekly surgery. That is an example of a number of sectors coming together to deliver. I believe that the framework that will be established will enhance provision and provide opportunities to roll it out further. I welcome the fact that the debate and the Government’s agenda will address some of the issues that the audit of community health partnerships identified. Although I am soon to be a former member of the Public Audit Committee, depending on how the vote goes at decision time today, I took part in committee discussions on the community health partnership audit that made it clear that issues needed to be addressed. Indeed, one of the first recommendations of that audit is that the Scottish Government should “work with NHS boards and councils to undertake a fundamental review of the various partnership arrangements for health and social care in Scotland to ensure that they are efficient and effective and add value”. I welcome the fact that the Government has clearly grasped that thistle and will introduce legislation, as outlined by the cabinet secretary. We should be aware, however, that there are often gaps in provision. One of the glaring gaps in the Grampian area is around advocacy, particularly mental health advocacy. My colleague Councillor Jim Kiddie, the chair of social care and wellbeing in Aberdeen City Council, has pushed very hard over many years to get NHS Grampian to advance advocacy services. Some funding has been unlocked—£75,000 over a three-year period—but the problem is that that is non-recurring expenditure and it will not necessarily lead to properly planned and resourced advocacy. One of the key points about such advocacy for mental health sufferers is that it can save substantial amounts of money in other areas. I hope that when the cabinet secretary looks at the framework in general she will take a look at how advocacy services can fit within it to ensure that we deliver appropriate advocacy across the nation, particularly for people who have mental health problems.

I hear what the member is saying, but does he agree that the proposed changes would enhance many of those current examples? Indeed, in the conversations that I have had with NHS Grampian, it has welcomed what the Government is bringing forward, as it sees it very much as an enhancement of the work that is being done locally, not a threat to it.

A 200-signature letter and a 17,000-signature petition were yesterday handed in to the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister by industry representatives. What representations does the minister plan to make to the UK Government to try to have it reverse what I believe to be an illogical decision on the feed-in tariff for photovoltaics?

Rhoda Grant will be aware that many procurement contracts are bound by European procurement regulations, which mean that such companies are entitled to bid for contracts.

I agree with Rhoda Grant. Does she agree that one way around that situation would be for more companies to enter into consortia arrangements to bid for contracts, rather than bid against each other and lose tenders as a consequence?

I begin by declaring a small interest: my father is a director of a small business and my brother is employed as a health and safety adviser. I reassure Rhoda Grant that I do not necessarily disagree with the thrust of what she was saying on procurement. I was merely pointing out that, with the current EU procurement legislation, we have to be very careful when we draft clauses into procurement tenders. I am not saying that we should not seek to have local employment clauses where possible, because such things do have a benefit. I am aware of the protections afforded for certain organisations by, I think, article 12 of the EU directive, and I believe that local authorities need to do more to look at whether article 12 can be used in the tendering process. However, I emphasise again that there are some barriers.

I want to make some progress. I have a lot to get through. Some barriers could be overcome by consortia arrangements. I have spoken to many people from various industries who have bemoaned the letting of contracts to companies from beyond these shores. When they are asked whether they considered the possibility of consortia arrangements, to ensure the success of local companies, they often say that they were not aware of such an option. Very often their competitive nature precludes their considering such an option. Consortia arrangements are not a panacea, but they are an option that businesses should consider as a means of approaching tendering slightly differently. We should always be careful about how we characterise certain aspects of regulation, such as health and safety regulation. Nigel Don said that there is often a disparity between what is said about regulation and what happens in reality when we sit people down and ask them to identify regulations that meet the supposed acid test. All too often, the rhetoric about health and safety legislation—and regulation in general—does not match the reality. Too often, decisions that are totally unrelated to health and safety are held up as sticks with which to beat the industry and we hear people talk about “health and safety gone mad.” An infamous example was the supposed regulations that required children playing conkers in England to wear goggles, which no less a person than David Cameron mentioned. That turned out to be nothing to do with health and safety; it was entirely down to an individual headteacher, who had taken a slightly overzealous decision. The point is that the trivialising of health and safety regulation should be a concern not just for the Health and Safety Executive but for politicians. Members of the Scottish Parliament are all too acutely aware of the importance of strong health and safety regulation, for example in the oil and gas sector, where strong regulation that was brought in following disasters such as the Piper Alpha disaster has strengthened protection for offshore workers. Whenever we hear people decry the work of the HSE, we must repeat the mantra that health and safety saves lives.

I agree. It is unfortunate that sometimes it takes a major incident to sharpen minds and focus attention. We ought to do everything that we can do to ensure that regulation is fit for purpose to prevent such incidents from occurring, so that we do not need to learn those lessons. Mr Brown is keen on the BRIA approach and his researcher has been clocking up the Google miles in recent weeks to find him all kinds of quotations and examples—I see that Mr Brown is indicating that he has been doing the work himself; I apologise to him and to his researcher. The Government has said that it thinks that a BRIA in relation to the public health levy would be disproportionate. Even if Mr Brown does not believe that—and I suspect that he does not—it is difficult to reconcile complaints about the economic impact on supermarkets with what I read in the newspapers about supermarkets slashing prices at the petrol pump. One wonders what economic impact that approach has.

No, no—there is more. It is a bit rich of Mr Brown to talk about the impact on businesses, given the “Tory VAT bombshell”—copyright Nick Clegg—which impacts not just on major retailers but on all businesses. Given the significant economic impact, one wonders where the impact assessment of that approach was. Although the amendment from the Conservative Party mentions empty property relief, Mr Brown made no mention of the issue. Perhaps that is because he realises that the economic impact of empty properties in and of themselves is significant in communities up and down the country, which is why action is needed to try to reinvigorate and regenerate the economies of local communities. No one is saying that deregulation in and of itself is wrong. However, we should base it on logic, not on arithmetic.

Will the member give way?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is bizarre that certain Opposition spokespeople call for him to take a hands-on approach to further and higher education in relation to fees and redundancies, for example, while calling for him to take a hands-off approach to sector reform? Does he agree that consistency of approach from Opposition parties, albeit unlikely, would be welcome?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

As other speakers have said, this is an extremely important issue. When I was at school, teachers used to bend over backwards to encourage students to stay on beyond fourth year and go on to fifth and sixth year. However, according to Jenny Marra, it is bad that the numbers who are staying on for fifth and sixth year are now rising. To be honest, I do not think that there is any statistic in the world that she could not turn into a doom-and-gloom scenario. Jenny Marra rose— I am only just starting. I might give way a little bit later once I have developed my speech. When asked, Jenny Marra could not even bring herself to say whether she welcomed the retention of education maintenance allowance. Does she agree that, sometimes, not everything in the garden is rubbish?

No, it was retained in Scotland. That has been welcomed across the board. I did not use the phrase that Iain Gray said that we would all use and which Jenny Marra has now accused me of using, which I will not say.

That is on the record. Let us move on and consider some of the things that are being done. Positive steps are being taken, such as the provision of 25,000 modern apprenticeships per year. The Government’s record on attracting inward investment from companies such as TAQA, Amazon and PetroChina—the list goes on—is also positive. The trade mission to Brazil is being led by Michael Moore, who must be struggling with the notion of telling companies to invest while, at the same time, hoping that they do not, so that he can blame the failure on the threat of independence. No doubt he is telling the captains of Brazilian industry that they are doing well but would have done so much better if they had stayed under Portuguese control. The opportunities for all scheme is significant and will provide for 16 to 19-year-olds. Positive work is also being done on the ground. I will highlight some examples from the north-east. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has visited Aberdeen Foyer and will be aware of the work that it does to try to alleviate youth homelessness and unemployment in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. As a north-east member, Richard Baker will also be aware of that work. Aberdeen Foyer offers a number of programmes, of which I will highlight a couple. The training for work programme provides training support for people aged 18 and above who are unemployed and actively looking for work. It provides a range of specialist vocational training and, crucially, on-the-job experience. The employers who offer those opportunities range from small businesses right up to multinational companies. They also range across the construction, retail, hospitality and administration sectors. The programme offers opportunities and helps to increase young people’s employability, which is also important. It is about not only increasing employment but increasing employability and giving young people the skills that they require to make the transition into the workplace. There is also the Prince’s Trust team, which works to enable 16 to 25-year-olds to develop confidence, motivation and skills. We should remember that, for many young people, going to an interview or trying to access work is a daunting experience. We must empower them to make that transition. Another project that I will highlight is the youth opportunities database project for Aberdeenshire, which has been helpfully and amusingly acronymised to the YODA project. It allows young people aged 16 to 19 who may require additional support to gain a place in education, employment or training in order to secure a positive destination on leaving school or, if they are in learning programmes, increase their employability skills. The project has a number of aims. It aims to close the skills gap, particularly for the bottom 20 per cent of young people in schools who need additional support; to develop the basic skills and confidence of those who have disengaged from education or are at risk of doing so; to increase employability through education, training and volunteering opportunities; and to support and develop projects that target young people during the crucial transition to adulthood. That time is often very difficult for young people and, in some cases, they require support. The project was initially a pilot project that was run over the 2010 winter period but, due to a diverse range of people applying and the feedback that was received, it has been extended and will continue for the foreseeable future. The First Minister rightly spoke about the responsibility that we all have, including adult Scots, but there are examples of young Scots who are looking out for each other. In Aberdeen, there is the Mastrick young unemployed project, which tries to help into work unemployed young people and single parents, for example. The project’s committee is almost exclusively made up of young people. Young people are looking to help each other to get that vital first step into the workplace. Good work is therefore being done that could be replicated in other areas. We all have a responsibility to share in the chamber best practice from the communities that we represent. SNP members do not for one second underestimate the challenge that faces us, but we have a duty as parliamentarians to highlight in the Parliament the good things that are happening and to see whether they can be replicated elsewhere. We owe it to young people to do everything in our power to move them forward. We should not simply come to the Parliament and say that things are going badly; rather, we must ensure that what we do in the Parliament drives forward an agenda to make things better.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with train operators and British Transport Police regarding passenger behaviour. (S4O-00438)

Alcohol consumption on trains often leads to an uncomfortable travelling experience for many passengers. That is the result of the behaviour of a minority of passengers who take things too far. Will the minister join me in welcoming the fact that British Transport Police has identified alcohol misuse on the train network as a strategic priority for next year, and will he assure me that the Scottish Government will work constructively with British Transport Police and the train operators on that matter?

Mr Rennie asserts that the choice was exactly the same for the UK Government. Who was writing to Danny Alexander, telling him that they were going to cut his budget?

Does Kevin Stewart agree that, if we were to mark St Andrew’s day as a national holiday, it could take on the same significance as St Patrick’s day does for Irish people and others, with the associated economic impact that that has across the globe?

With regard to the financial impact, does Dr Simpson share my regret that the carers allowance remains such a pitiful sum, and excludes many carers—particularly elderly carers—who do not qualify for it?

I very much welcome the strategy and the strong statement of intent that it contains. It is clear from what the minister has said, and indeed from the increase in respite, the announcement on the change fund and today’s announcement on short breaks, that that intent is being backed up by action. I have heard others across the chamber say that we are not there yet. I would point out that we are one year into a five-year strategy. I know that the Government is good, but if it were to achieve everything in a five-year strategy in the first year alone, it would be doing one hell of a job. The minister has quite rightly acknowledged that there are still challenges to be faced. In my speech, I will focus on what is essentially a tale of two carers. Over the summer, thanks to the work of Lynn Williams of the Princess Royal Trust for Carers and Lucy Whiteman of VSA Aberdeenshire, I shadowed a carer for a day. I shadowed Stephanie Chalmers, who cares for her son Connor in Turriff in the north-east. Connor is 10, he has cerebral palsy and he requires 24/7 care. During the course of the day, I did what I could to help Stephanie, whether by pushing the wheelchair into the car, helping feed Connor his lunch or joining him in playing his Xbox, which is an interest that we share. The day drove home to me the strain that parent carers often feel and highlighted the fact that, sometimes, it is the little things that help to make a difference and assist people. I will highlight two points today. I could highlight a myriad, but I will focus on a couple that we perhaps do not often consider. The first point is that carers often have to locate support networks themselves because the NHS and local authorities do not readily highlight them to them. Such networks can be highly beneficial because people share their experiences and a camaraderie forms. We need to change our attitude and provide that information to carers, rather than leave them to seek it out on top of doing everything else. The other point relates to something that is key for Stephanie and her husband and by which I was quite surprised. For Connor to go to the toilet they require a hoist, but the only disabled toilet in the north-east that has a hoist is in Union Square in Aberdeen. I wrote to the Government about that and am pleased that it is reviewing the building standards regulations to ensure that such facilities are more prevalent. Little things like that make a big difference to carers, particularly their physical wellbeing. Although he is 10, Connor is a big boy. As he grows older, he will get bigger and it will become more difficult to do simple things such as take him to the toilet. The second carer I will mention is my mother. I have said in previous debates that she was a carer. She cared for my grandmother, who suffered from dementia and passed away in early October. I saw at first hand the work that my mother did to care for my grandmother. The two impacts of caring that have been brought home to me are the health impacts and the financial impacts. If Connor does not sleep, Stephanie and her husband do not sleep; if my grandmother did not sleep, my mother did not sleep. We sometimes forget that caring is often a 24/7, 365-day-a-year role. No night shift comes in to let carers go away. Although respite care is crucial, it is only a part of the overall solution. We must ensure that we do everything possible to protect carers’ physical and emotional health and wellbeing because, if we do not, they will become tomorrow’s cared-for. I know that the minister and the Government are aware of the need to support carers in that way. I touched on the financial impacts in my intervention on Richard Simpson. Bill Kidd touched on them as well. The carers allowance is, to be frank, a joke. In essence, it is blackmail, because the United Kingdom Government knows that carers will not give up caring for their relatives, because they do it for love and that will prevent them from downing tools no matter how hard it gets. It is almost as if it is saying that it knows that they will not give up, so there is no impetus for it to give them a better deal. That is shameful. The Parliament should unite and say that enough is enough. It is time that the UK Government examined carefully the fundamental role that carers play and exactly what the impact on the health service and social care would be if they were to down tools. At the moment, many people who care do not even qualify for the carers allowance. We spoke about young carers. If someone is in full-time education, they are excluded from claiming the carers allowance. If someone is in part-time education and their course lasts for more than 21 hours a week, it is classed as a full-time course. Therefore, young carers are, in effect, discouraged and dissuaded from going into further education if they want to be able to claim some kind of financial support once they turn 16. Before they turn 16, no financial support is available to them. We must change our mentality, because 100,000 young carers are doing without. We need to consider that situation carefully and reflect on how we can change it. The other week, I attended the reception for Tommy on tour. Tommy Whitelaw, a carer, walked across Scotland collecting stories from carers who look after loved ones with dementia. I met him when he was in Aberdeen and my mum wrote to him to tell her story. At the reception, a DVD was shown in which carers told their stories of what it is like to care for a loved one with dementia. It was extremely moving and I encourage everyone to watch it. If anyone wants, I will gladly send them the link, because it makes for powerful viewing. The Scottish Government has the right intention and the action to back it up is happening. I look forward to working with the Government over the next four years to ensure that the strategy is fully implemented.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what factors are taken into consideration when allocating funding from the proceeds of crime. (S4O-00370)

Many groups and organisations across north-east Scotland have benefited from cashback funding. In last week’s justice debate in the chamber, Labour’s justice spokesperson called for the funding to be directed purely and simply to those communities that the cash actually comes from. Will the cabinet secretary resist that call and ensure that communities across Scotland continue to benefit from that worthwhile funding?

With regard to the zero waste strategy, the cabinet secretary will be aware that the 2010 householder survey showed a significant boost in household recycling rates. What timeframe does he envisage for providing all households in Scotland with separate recycling bins, which will help with the country’s recycling effort and assist households in recycling more waste?

I note that the member’s amendment would delete all reference to the PWC report. What aspect of that report does he disagree with so fundamentally that he seeks to delete all reference to it?

In June, I had a members’ business debate on oil and gas taxation. It was a constructive debate, which was handled constructively by all parties across the chamber. It is good to see that I appear to have set the tone for oil and gas debates in the Parliament this session—long may that continue. I agree with much that has been said by all members in today’s debate thus far. Lewis Macdonald rightly referred to some of the tragedies that have taken place in the North Sea. One of the fatalities in the recent Super Puma crash, Stuart Wood from Newmachar, was in the year below me at Dyce academy and played in the school football team with me, so the issue affects many people in my peer group, with whom I grew up. I note that the report on that crash is due out soon and I have no doubt that lessons will be learned in the industry. I agree with the minister that it is important to focus on the positives and to look forward. The Scottish Government has been engaged constructively and, I hope, productively with the UK Government on the taxation regime in the North Sea. Although one would undoubtedly have hoped that the previous decision would have been taken following slightly more consultation with the industry, one hopes that, moving forward, there will be a period of consultation, which would help to alleviate concerns in the industry caused by some last-gasp decision making. I hope that the UK Government’s ears are open to that argument when the minister makes it to them. I agree that there is a need to address skills gaps. In particular, Oil & Gas UK has highlighted to me that a gap exists in the middle between those who are graduate entrants or young entrants into the industry and those who are coming to the brink of retirement. One of the reasons why that gap exists is a subconscious mood out there that somehow the industry did not have a future. The short-termism that often defined the way in which the oil and gas industry was talked about led people to consider that it was perhaps not an attractive industry to move into. That has created something of a problem and a requirement for the gap to be filled. The oil and gas industry advisory group has identified six priorities, one of which is skills. That is extremely important. I note that the PWC report refers to the work by, for example, Talisman and Wood Group in offering university scholarships. Indeed, the report encourages other companies in the sector to consider moving down a similar route. Along with a number of other members, I attended the launch of Professor Alex Kemp’s worthy tome on the history of North Sea oil and gas. [Interruption.] Bless you, Ms Boyack. It was interesting to note, in the course of that evening, how many of the students on Professor Kemp’s course come from other areas of the world, where oil and gas sectors are seen as a long-term prospect, and how few people from the locale were on the course. We must do more to encourage people to believe that this is an industry that they can go into and that it will not decline within 10 to 25 years, as was so often the mantra. I welcome the shift in focus that has taken place, which is constructive. Had some of our opponents’ political predecessors perhaps had the foresight to talk up the longevity of the industry to the same extent, some of the problems might not have arisen. We had a discussion earlier today on female employment. OPITO produced a report that suggests that there has been an increase in the number of females being attracted to work in the oil and gas industry, which has often been viewed as very masculine and macho. Work has been done, for example by Aberdeen College and the sector, to try to provide places for people from Kinloss and Lossiemouth, who are leaving the Ministry of Defence, on the drilling transformation training programme that is planned at Aberdeen College. The Prince’s Trust has also worked on developing a new basic entry programme for unemployed and disadvantaged workers. The industry has undertaken all that positive work, which we should welcome. I am pleased that Mr Brown was able to clarify that the Tory amendment does not seek to disregard the PricewaterhouseCoopers report in its entirety, because there is much in that report that is worthy and to be commended. The report identifies that up to 24 billion barrels of oil could be extracted from the UK continental shelf. In fact, there is some discussion in the oil industry about whether that estimate could be increased depending on further investment and exploration. The west of Shetland fields, for example, could generate upwards of $600 billion in the next 40 years alone. The report states that contrary to the view that North Sea production is in terminal decline, the outlook for the oil and gas industry in Aberdeen is positive. There is a wealth of exciting opportunities that will enable Aberdeen to continue prospering, through utilising new technology to extend the life of existing fields or through developing incremental reserves or greenfield sites. I am sure that my fellow members for the north-east and Aberdeen welcome, as I do, that analysis and the industry’s positive vision for the future of Aberdeen. I accept entirely the chancellor’s contention that investment is taking place. That is evident from BP, TAQA and Premier Oil, from the recent announcement from Talisman Energy and Wood Group and from the acquisition of ExxonMobil assets by Apache. At the same time, though, there is a real need to focus in on the brownfield and marginal sites, which are the ones that are most affected by the tax changes. That is why I hope that the constructive discussions that are taking place will result in something a little better in the future. A simple equation is that skills development depends on investment and investment depends on confidence. I am pleased that it appears that there will be no more short-termism and no more talking down the future prospects of the industry. Parliament should unite to say that oil and gas has a robust and optimistic future. The issue must be handled carefully. I know that the Scottish Government and the minister will be working to ensure that the next 40 to 50 years are handled better than the previous 40 years.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

On the basis that the levy has not been implemented, we are currently consulting on it. Even if the member does not agree with me about that, does he agree that it is somewhat facetious to try to draw equivalence between the health levy and the tax grab on the oil industry?

As we approach remembrance Sunday, will the First Minister join me in condemning the recent acts of disrespect at the Gordon Highlanders statue in Aberdeen and the commando memorial in Spean Bridge? Given the close links between those and other historic Scottish regiments and their local communities, does the First Minister agree that everyone should be aware of troops’ sacrifices past and present, and that they should give them the respect and honour that they deserve?

The cabinet secretary rightly highlighted some of the good work that Aberdeen Foyer has done. As the Government looks to shift towards preventative spending, what role does he see organisations such as Aberdeen Foyer and others in the voluntary sector playing as part of that agenda?

The member might be aware of a pilot scheme that was undertaken in Dundee in which, at the end of the reablement process, some 60 per cent of users required no on-going social care services. That work is being done in other places as well, and it demonstrates that, in the past, we have been too quick to put people into care packages when that might not have been the best route for them to take.

Sometimes I wonder what life would be like in the alternate reality that some members of the Labour Party seem to occupy: the one where there is no need to take responsibility for anything and one can increase a budget without the consequential need to reduce another budget. Unfortunately, that view was epitomised in Mary Fee’s speech, which essentially contained no ideas and was just moaning. It also sums up how Labour approached the 2011 election campaign, which is why the arithmetic in the chamber adds up the way it does—[Interruption.] I hear the convener of the Health and Sport Committee getting rather exercised as he leaves the chamber. Nonetheless, that is where we are. With regard to what Jackie Baillie was saying, it is always interesting to see where Labour defines year zero. It usually tends to land somewhere after 2007: things only ever get bad after 2007, and all was rosy before that.

I will, in just a second. My colleague Kevin Stewart quite rightly highlighted the delayed discharge situation. I accept that some progress was made under the Labour Party, but in 2007, when this party came to power, there were still 233 people under delayed discharge. This Government has made significant progress in that regard. Yes—the numbers are too high at present, but we should never forget the situation that we inherited and the progress that has been made under this Government. It is very churlish to keep talking—as Dr Simpson did—about things going backward. We are nowhere near going backward to the situation that we inherited in 2007, and it is disingenuous to suggest as much. I will, of course, give way to Jackie Baillie.

I hope that the Presiding Officer might be a little bit lenient with my timing; Jackie Baillie, having used up almost all the extra time in the debate in her own speech, has now taken a huge chunk out of my time with her intervention. We have a higher level of allied health professional full-time-equivalent employment now—by more than 500—than we did in September 2006. I say to Jackie Baillie that the issues of unemployment and difficulties in the job market for speech and language therapists and physiotherapists are not new phenomena. They very much existed when the Labour Executive was in power, and that Administration did not manage to solve the problem either. The minister has highlighted quite clearly that the issue is very much on his agenda, so we should back him in what he wants to do. Being a positive individual like my colleague George Adam, I will focus on some positive examples of where work is being done, particularly on integration of health and social care. I am grateful to my colleague Kevin Stewart for allowing me to focus on the work that is done at Rosewell house and Smithfield court, if for no other reason than that my speech would otherwise have been very short. Rosewell house, which I have mentioned before in the chamber, opened in Aberdeen in 2009. It is a purpose-built 60-bed care home that provides residential, respite and rehabilitation places in a partnership approach between the council and the NHS. When we talk about the need for the integration of health and social care services and the need for the NHS to work more closely with council services, Aberdeen has a good story to tell. I will come to that again when I talk about Smithfield court. Rosewell house has a large therapy suite and rehabilitation is delivered jointly by the council and NHS Grampian. Crucially, over time, the number of residential beds at Rosewell house will be reduced until it does not offer residential places, which ties in with the rehabilitation and reablement approach that is being taken. The facility is helping Aberdeen City Council to achieve extremely good delayed discharge figures. Besides that, there is Smithfield court, with which my colleague, Kevin Stewart, is extremely familiar. Not only is it in the council ward that he represents, it is at the bottom of the street where he lives, so he has a good knowledge of the facility. It is a multistorey sheltered housing complex within which 22 flats have been adapted for rehabilitation and within which NHS physiotherapy and occupational therapy staff operate. The council housing service collaborates closely with NHS Grampian to deliver those services, which are another key component in the council’s bid to reduce the number of delayed discharges. Clare Adamson made an important point about trips and falls. Aberdeen City Council is looking at a downsizing scheme that tries to house people in more appropriate surroundings, which is something that other councils could do. Often, elderly people live in the three-bedroom or four-bedroom council properties that they lived in with their families. When the family have grown up and moved out, those elderly people continue to live alone in such properties. We must do what we can to facilitate their moving to more appropriate properties such as amenity bungalows, where there is less likelihood of a trip and fall occurring because they do not have to go up and down stairs to get to their bedroom or bathroom. I would be grateful if the Presiding Officer would grant me a little leniency to speak briefly about the Dundee pilot scheme that I mentioned in my intervention on Malcolm Chisholm. The pilot scheme looked at a control group of 22 people who did not receive the enablement service and 22 people who received it. Over a six-week period, the number of hours of care that were required by the enablement sample group went from 314 to 154, whereas the number of hours of care required by the control group went from 275 to 204. Crucially, over a six-month period, the number of hours of care required went from 314 to 107 in the enablement group and from 275 to 279.5 in the control group. That shows that enablement services have a real role to play. There is a clear difference between savings in care hours and cuts in care hours. When savings in care hours are made, it is because people have been inappropriately placed in care packages—we have heard examples of that from around the chamber. We often put people into care packages because we think that it is the right thing to do, but it is not always the right thing to do, as those examples demonstrate. Thank you for your leniency, Presiding Officer.

Will the member take an intervention?

I, too, note my interest as a councillor on Aberdeen City Council. I join others by adding my words of support and admiration for the people who act as foster carers, kinship carers, adoptive parents, charitable organisations and social care professionals at a local authority level, who have been mentioned by a number of members. It is unfortunate that we tend to hear only about social care failings in cases such as those of Brandon Muir and Baby P. We should reflect on the fact that for every such high-profile case that is mentioned, dozens of examples of good practice take place in social care departments across the country. The fact that we do not hear enough of the good examples is perhaps an understandable reflection of the notion that good news does not sell papers, but it ought to give us pause for thought and we should do more to celebrate the good that is going on while ensuring that high-profile cases such as those that I have mentioned do not happen. We have discussed preventative spending and I want to highlight some examples of work that has been done in Aberdeen City Council with looked-after children. The first thing that we ought to try to do is offer rehabilitation and attempt to keep people from going into the care system in the first place. That is why the council took the decision to set up an intensive community support and learning service, based on Westburn Road in Aberdeen. It provides a direct alternative to care, offers individual, family and group work and education and learning programmes on site, and tries its best to help children at an early stage to avoid their having to be placed in care. The whole-system youth justice approach that has also been piloted recently in Aberdeen has received a positive evaluation as well as national recognition. The council is also making efforts to help looked-after children access the workplace, as well as taking more steps to assist them as they move on from the care setting. We should not forget that looked-after children become adults and we must do all that we can to ensure that their transition to places such as work and their own home is made as easy as possible for them as they leave care. I mentioned some of the high-profile cases that are highlighted by the media. Following such cases, we tend to see an increase in the number of concerns raised with social care departments. That can often, but not always, lead to increases in the numbers of looked-after children and children being put forward for potential care placements, which puts pressure on the work of the social care departments. My colleague Kevin Stewart mentioned out-of-authority placements. In June 2009, there were 38 out-of-authority placements at Aberdeen City Council and today there are 23. A lot of work has been done to try to bring children who were placed out of the authority area back to a more appropriate and local setting. We should be aware that although it is sometimes necessary for children to be placed outwith the local authority area, that should always be the very last resort. All too often, in the past, that was not the case. It was often the place of first, rather than last, resort. I was mildly amused to hear my colleague Kevin Stewart talking about overspends at Dundee City Council and how they were all right—those of us who had experience of Kevin as chair of the finance committee at Aberdeen City Council are not used to hearing him say such things. It is refreshing to see how liberating he has found the experience of moving this far.

Indeed. We should not lose sight of that. When we talk about the preventative spend agenda, we should remember that, according to the Aberdeen City Council figures that I have, a fostering placement costs on average £35,000 to £36,000 per annum, an in-house residential placement costs about £120,000, and a residential school placement costs £150,000 to £225,000. It is clear that money should not be the driving objective, but if we can achieve that difference of spend by placing children in appropriate foster care, it is surely a win-win situation. I agree that more can and should be done on kinship care. We at Aberdeen City Council have an ambition and an aspiration to reach full equivalence and the 85 per cent funding that is being put forward will undoubtedly help in that regard, but it would be unfair not to mention that the situation for kinship carers has improved dramatically in the past four years compared with the baseline of the situation in 2007. The debate has not focused as much on the difficulty in achieving adoption places for older children. Many would-be parents who come forward looking for children to adopt are looking for babies or very small children. There is an unwillingness to consider older children, who are often seen as carrying baggage and who often display challenging behaviours. It takes a special person to be able to deal with those behaviours and it is often difficult to get people to come forward. A deal of education and other work is needed to change the mindsets of the people who come forward to adopt children. We must ensure that older children who require an adoption place are not left lingering and waiting. I remember as a councillor watching a video that was made by and featured looked-after children in Aberdeen who spoke about their experiences, what they felt was good and bad and what they believed should be changed. We focus on getting children into care places, but we need to do all that we can to let young folk tell their stories, because they have much to teach us and we have much to learn from them.

Does the member not welcome the opportunities for all programme that the Government is introducing, which will ensure that people who leave school without a positive destination are given a guaranteed offer of either a training place or some form of employment?

I will certainly do all that I can to assist you in that respect, Presiding Officer. John Pentland said that the only thing missing from the motion was a reference to apple pie and cream. That is missing because it would be entirely incompatible with the Government’s healthy eating agenda. I say gently to the Labour Party that it is fine to complain that more funding is needed in certain areas. We heard from Ken Macintosh that we need extra money for our colleges. Given the proximity of Hallowe’en, he channelled the spirit of his colleague Michael McMahon—a scary prospect, I know—and told us that we needed extra money for local government as well. We hear regularly from Jackie Baillie that we need more money for health. Indeed, we hear regularly from every Labour spokesperson that we need more money in their area. If they can tell us where the magical money tree from which they would seek to take the money is, we will go and find it, get the money from it and put it into those areas.

No, thank you. However, we are operating within a fixed budget that has been cut by Westminster, and we must take tough decisions. At the same time, we must ensure that we deliver the opportunities that exist. As the cabinet secretary has emphasised, reform of the college sector is long overdue. It might be a case of making a virtue of necessity, but if reform in the college sector is accelerated as a result of the tight financial settlement, that might deliver some of the benefits that are required. If we look at some of the savings that have been achieved through reform of the college sector in the city of Glasgow, it is not beyond the realms of possibility to suggest that we could achieve significant savings across Scotland.

No. I have a very tight six minutes and I want to provide some positive examples. It has been a good debate for positive examples, and I want to look at different stages of some positive examples in my area. My wife is a committee member of Dyce community centre, which is in the community where we live. It is holding its first ever under-fives week this week. It regularly holds an over-50s week, when the over-50s can sample what the centre has to offer. In the under-fives week, it is promoting a range of activities for children from kindergym to messy play to music and dance. We often forget the quality that can be brought into children’s lives from engaging in such activities; we focus far too much on taking a hard-nosed educational view, but other kinds of activity for the under-fives are often vital in helping them to form early social skills and to move on into education. We should not forget to focus on parents as well as children. During the under-fives week, there are also activities for parents. The community centre has set up support groups for things such as breastfeeding and post-natal depression, in an effort to assist parents and give them the support they need so that they can make a positive impact on their children’s early years. The Government and its agencies have a role to play in those early years, but we should never overlook the need to support the vital role of parents. Parents will also support each other in having a positive impact in the lives of their children. I will now consider secondary education and collaborative approaches. My secondary school, Dyce academy, has long taken a collaborative approach, sharing with the former Bankhead academy and now Bucksburn academy higher and advanced higher courses. Children from each school can go to the other for those courses. Alternatively, courses can be run jointly by the schools. That can help many pupils who might otherwise struggle to attain the qualifications that they wish to, or which they require in order to get to university. That is especially true in some of the more niche subjects. I would not have been able to do sixth year studies in English had the course not been run jointly; there was not sufficient interest in my school alone. That collaboration has been running for a number of years, and perhaps other schools across Scotland need to consider working in such a way with neighbouring schools. Many members will know of similar examples from their areas. I turn now to links between schools, colleges and universities—the final stage of the educational journey. A number of good examples exist in my area. The aspire north programme is a collaboration between universities, colleges and schools that tries to engage with pupils in S3 to S6 and to raise their awareness of the value of further and higher education, to encourage aspiration and build self-confidence. There are also good partnership links between colleges and universities. The University of Aberdeen has built strong links with Banff and Buchan College and Aberdeen College, and there is the unilink programme between Robert Gordon University and Aberdeen College, offered on a two-plus-two basis—students can do two years of a college course and then go straight into third year at university. That helps to break down some of the barriers that exist to access to higher education for those who perhaps cannot make the direct leap from secondary school to university. They are given the opportunity to bridge the gap. Consideration should be given to the question whether such collaborative approaches can be replicated elsewhere in Scotland. I regret the notion that Ken Macintosh introduced—that universities are somehow elitist institutions. That rhetoric belongs in the past. It does not reflect my experience of Scottish universities, or the experience of anybody I know. If the Labour Party is now defining universities as elitist, that may explain why Ed Miliband wants to close half of them.

Given that the UK Government has not only failed to introduce games tax relief, despite assurances by the previous Government that it would—the present incumbents show no desire to do so—and given that Ireland appears to be considering tax breaks in this area, does the First Minister agree that it is vital that the UK Government acts now to ensure that the games industry continues to invest in Scotland and does not start looking elsewhere? If the UK Government will not do so, is it not time that it gave us the powers to do it ourselves?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

I will do what I can to assist the Presiding Officer in that regard. I declare an interest as a member of Aberdeen City Council. The notion appears to be that reform is needed and that we must therefore back these reforms, as it is not good enough simply to say that they are not suitable. In the past few days, however, we have had a range of briefings from a variety of organisations throughout the voluntary sector, which have made sensible suggestions for ways in which the bill could be changed to better reflect the needs of vulnerable people in society. I suggest that it might be worth the UK Government’s while to take the time to reflect on those submissions and to take on board some of the sensible suggestions that voluntary groups and organisations—which are dealing directly with the very people who will be affected by the changes—have made. It is unfortunate that Liam McArthur tried to insinuate that there is not a different way to do this. There is always a different way to do things; the question is whether one has the political will to do it. It might be worth the Liberal Democrats’ while to choose this moment to exercise the much talked-about, but little-seen, civilising influence that they claim to have over their Conservative counterparts. Now is the time and now is the hour, Mr McArthur: let us have some of it.

No. I want to get through my speech as quickly as possible to assist the Presiding Officer. Let us consider the impact on local authority budgets. Aberdeen City Council has received a range of reports to its social care and wellbeing committee and its housing and environment committee that focus on the impact that the reforms would have. Those reports clearly show that there would be a reduction in housing benefit because of the change to the excess, and they highlight the potential for increased council tax and rent arrears, which would impact directly on local authority budgets. Beyond that, the stresses and strains that are placed on people who find themselves in detrimental positions will likely lead to the outcome of increased demand on social care services resulting from the impact on individuals’ mental health and wellbeing as they go through the process. Mary Scanlon did not accept my interventions, but I fully accept that she was pushed for time, so I will use my speech as an opportunity to retort to some of her points. She said that 40 per cent of ESA decisions that were made under the work capability assessment and which were challenged were overturned. That is correct, but when the appellants were represented at their appeals, the figure rose to more than 60 per cent. To me, the entire process appears to be starting from the wrong position, if more than 60 per cent of appeals are being overturned when appropriate representation is given to appellants. I suggest that that needs to be looked at and thought through.

Mary Scanlon is pushing it in asking me to accept an intervention when she did not accept any of mine. Mary Scanlon also spoke about error. I looked this up. At the moment, £3.3 billion is lost annually through fraud and error—one third through fraud, one third through claimant error and one third through official error. What does the UK Government propose to do about it? It proposes to introduce a £50 fine for claimant error but has no proposal to increase official accountability. Beyond that, it proposes to remove the right of appeal against clawback of overpayments due to official error. So, the mantra is that if it is the individual’s mistake, the individual will be punished and, if it is the UK Government’s mistake, the individual will be punished. Frankly, Sir Humphrey Appleby could not have made that policy up, and it is abhorrent that it is even being considered in the legislation. That is one change that the UK Government could make that would make a positive difference. We must do all that we can to ensure that the bill does not impact detrimentally on the most vulnerable people in society.

It is good that the Labour Party welcomes the consensual approach that we are taking in accepting the Labour amendment. I worry about the tone that would have been struck had we said that we were not going to support the amendment. If ever the phrase “grudging support” needed definition, we just heard it. I say gently to Mr Findlay that he is treading on shaky ground in talking about “rank hypocrisy” after the Labour Party had 13 years in which to make appropriate reforms to the welfare system and to introduce something better than what we have—there is general acceptance across the chamber that what we currently have is not fit for purpose—which would have prevented the wrack and ruin that the Conservative Party is seeking to be brought upon the poorest people in society. I am sorry, but Labour left the door open for the Conservative Party to drive a coach and horses through it, so Mr Findlay must accept his party’s culpability. We must ensure that the reforms are tailored to prevent hardship from being brought on the poorest and most vulnerable in society. That is why, at decision time, we should support the motion in the name of the cabinet secretary as amended by the Labour Party. I give you 30 seconds, Presiding Officer.

Like many in the chamber and in wider society, I have experience of losing a family member to cancer. It is worth noting that none of us in the chamber is immune to the situations that people across Scotland face in that regard. That said, we must always try to avoid becoming too emotional during debates on this issue; we must be rational as well as emotional when we discuss cancer and, in particular, cancer treatment. It is fair to say that the cancer drugs fund has not met with the universal acclaim that one might have assumed it received if one had listened to the speeches from Conservative members. Indeed, a recent article in the oncology commission journal of The Lancet stated of the fund: “because these decisions are regional, it reintroduces the postcode lottery”— thereby leading to disparities in England, as the cabinet secretary outlined. Mary Fee referred to an article in The Daily Telegraph, which pointed out that the Society and College of Radiographers had stated clearly that the fund was diverting money away from treatment and areas such as radiotherapy services. There is clear evidence that the cancer drugs fund is not all that it is cracked up to be, so we should exercise a degree of caution about it. It is entirely appropriate that we focus our efforts on prevention and preventative spending, which the Government is seeking to drive forward. The Government is extremely keen on early detection, which is an approach that I support because the earlier a cancer is detected, the greater the patient’s chances of survival. We should focus our efforts on early detection, rather than diverting money towards end-of-life treatments for cancer patients. I fully accept that this is an emotive issue, but we must always take into account the fact that in many cases prolonging life does not increase quality of life. The key consideration for any health professional looking at life-prolonging treatments, must be the quality of life for the individual, not necessarily longevity. In that regard, we must ensure that there is expenditure on end-of-life and palliative care. I am concerned that if we were to focus our efforts simply on directing money towards the treatment of cancer, as well as neglecting early detection we could neglect appropriate end-of-life care for individuals who no longer respond to treatment or who require simply to be made comfortable towards the end of their life. The oncology commission journal of The Lancet states: “Today, early detection and cancer-specific treatment advances have resulted in increased cancer survival” rates. I support the Government’s focus on early detection, because it increases cancer survival rates—it is where we should be targeting our efforts. This is a worthwhile debate, but the establishment of a cancer drugs fund would be a distraction. Other organisations that deal with terminal conditions would ask us, “If cancer drugs are a priority, why not drugs for heart disease or Alzheimer’s?” We must ensure that, at all times, the health of the nation in general is the priority for this Parliament. Yes, there will undoubtedly be individual cases that need to be dealt with—there always are—but the appropriate way to deal with them is as individual cases, as the cabinet secretary said. Where there are local difficulties, it is entirely appropriate that they are highlighted to Government so that it can see whether it can make changes to the mindset at a local level, but dealing with local difficulties on a national basis is using a sledgehammer to crack a nut.

I will conclude with one final quotation from the oncology commission journal of The Lancet: “prevention is also essential and this too demands political will, ample funding, and a substantial change in mindset”. This Government has demonstrated the political will, provided the funding and made the change in mindset required to ensure that prevention is at the heart of what we do.

Will the member take an intervention?

I declare an interest, in that my wife is a member of Dyce and Stoneywood community council in Aberdeen. Does the minister feel that more could be done to ensure that community councils are more representative of the wider community, particularly by involving more young people, who often do not see community councils as being relevant to them?

Will the member give way?

Like Lewis Carroll’s Alice, I try to believe six impossible things before breakfast. Two such things that I considered this morning were that the EU would accept that the CFP is redundant and that a UK Government minister would arrive at EU negotiations with Scotland’s best interests at heart. I think that we must accept that both scenarios are highly unlikely. I want to address the point that the Labour Party appears to be making about Scotland being better represented in the EU as part of the UK, and the notion of the Scottish role in the common fisheries policy. If we could play a full part in EU negotiations on reform of the CFP or otherwise, we might end up with a policy that would suit Scotland and its fishing interests. Currently, we have no role in that, and we are not able to head the UK delegation to ensure that our voice is heard. As a result, the Scottish Parliament loses out. When EU legislation affects devolved matters such as fisheries, the Scottish Parliament loses legislative power and accountability. If the minister does not lead on behalf of the Scottish fishing industry, the Parliament has an issue in how we hold the minister to account for decisions that affect the Scottish fishing fleet but are made in the European Union. An accountability gap is created. I entirely understand the point that is made that, if we were to become an independent nation, we would effectively be a small fish in a big pond, but at the moment we are essentially a small fish inside the stomach of a large fish. We can talk and shout as much as we want to, but at the end of the day, nobody hears us, and it is not our voice that speaks when negotiations are undertaken.

Therefore, the most important thing is that the lead minister in the negotiations is the Scottish minister. I welcome Elaine Murray’s acknowledgment that, as long as the UK is negotiating on Scotland’s behalf for such a vital Scottish interest, it must be the Scottish minister who is at the top table. As long as we are party to the CFP, we must ensure that it is designed in a way that works best—or in the least worst way—for our fishermen and fishing communities. I think that there is cross-party consensus that the common fisheries policy is not good for Scotland and its fishermen. That is why in some respects I struggle to reconcile Elaine Murray’s contention that we must trust the UK Government to have our nation’s interests at heart with her concerns—which I share—that tradeable fishing quotas could have a potentially devastating impact on the Scottish industry. Given that, according to the cabinet secretary, the UK Government seems to be persuaded or, indeed, seduced by that approach, it strikes me that a potential logical non sequitur is at play. Even allowing for Alex Fergusson’s understandable caveat on how tradeable quotas could potentially be implemented, we can probably rely on history to instruct us that, when it comes to the EU and the UK operating on behalf of Scotland—or supposedly on its behalf—the wrong choice is usually made. We should therefore probably be very cautious about tradeable quotas. The cabinet secretary referred to the infamous Tory memorandum that said of Scotland’s fishing fleet that “in the wider UK context, they must be regarded as expendable”. Interestingly, Murdo Fraser seems to have reached the same conclusion about the Scottish Conservatives. Alex Johnstone said that the Labour Party is implicated in this situation as well. I accept that Labour does not have a glowing record when it comes to standing up for the Scottish fishing fleet. The figures show that 70 per cent of the UK catch is landed in Scotland and that, in 2009, 38.4 per cent was landed in ports in the north-east. Between 1997 and 2009, there was a nearly 90 per cent decline in landings at Aberdeen and an 8.5 per cent decline in Fraserburgh. That was linked entirely to demersals and the impact that total allowable catches and quotas had on those stocks. There was a modest increase of 2.7 per cent in the landings at Peterhead, which I suspect we can link to the pelagic sector, which has undergone a phenomenal increase. Nevertheless, overall, there was a 16.3 per cent decline in the number of fish landed at north-east ports. Obviously, that has had a devastating impact on fishing communities across the north-east, as any member who represents that area or has visited those communities will know. That is why tradeable quotas represent a threat to our smaller ports. If the worst-case scenario is borne out, large amounts of quota will be purchased from Scottish fishermen—who will take the opportunity to make money by selling their quota, as they would be perfectly entitled to do—without there being any guarantee that that quota of fish will be landed in Scottish ports, which would mean that the ports would suffer. If there is a decline in the number of ports due to closure, the industry is unlikely to be viable. If quotas are sold, the ports might decline to such a state that they are incapable of coping with landings in the future. That is a vicious circle that could lead to significant problems for the industry. There can be no doubt that the UK Government’s record on negotiating for Scotland and Scotland’s fishing fleet is lamentable, if not disgraceful. That is why it is vital that we go further than simply ensuring that the Scottish Government works with the UK Government. I fully accept that the cabinet secretary will do all that he can to persuade UK ministers to take Scotland’s interests to heart, but the sad fact is that, once the UK minister sits down at the table, all the persuading that the cabinet secretary will have done will matter nothing while that minister trades away Scotland’s rights and fishing fleet. We absolutely must have a situation in which the cabinet secretary is the man at the table who is negotiating on behalf of Scotland’s fishing industry, whether that be as the head of the UK delegation or—my preference—of an independent Scottish delegation.

I wholly accept the right of the member to articulate different priorities. Perhaps, in the spirit of constructive opposition, he will outline to the Parliament how he would fund those different priorities from within a fixed budget.

I know that the Labour Party does not oppose energy from waste per se, and I give it credit for that. I know that because when Aberdeen City Council—I declare my interest as a member of that council—discussed and decided on our waste strategy, which includes options for energy from waste, the strategy received the unanimous backing of all political parties that are represented on the council, which include Labour. Labour does not oppose the general principle of energy from waste. I will broaden the focus of the debate, but perhaps narrow it in terms of geography. We have spoken about the waste hierarchy, but we are in danger of being caught between the two fixed positions of landfill and incineration. However, there are other ways in which to deal with waste. There are good examples of companies in my region that deal with waste creatively and add value to it. I know that the minister is keen on the approach of viewing waste as a resource. One of those companies is Keenan Recycling of Turriff, which for several years has been recycling food and garden waste into compost material. The company can process up to 100,000 tonnes every year and now operates the largest vertical composting unit in Europe. The recycled organics are used in products that benefit the end users, communities and the environment. The main products are compost, garden bark and, as I found out only recently, a specialist product for indoor and outdoor equestrian areas called Equishred. There are also examples of small organisations in the north-east, such as the Pitscurry project, which is run by the Pitcaple Environmental Project, and Wood RecyclAbility at Udny. Both are small local enterprises with community benefits and which provide meaningful employment for adults with learning disabilities and minor physical disabilities. They involve taking delivery of uncontaminated wood pallets and turning them into garden furniture and other items. Michael McMahon spoke about the consumer demand for newness but, particularly in times of economic difficulties, there is a focus on, and genuine interest in, products that have been developed in a way that involves reuse. Those enterprises provide not just environmental value, but social value. We must consider that in thinking about how to deal with the waste hierarchy. Another project that I want to highlight is The Box Room in Banchory, which is a community project that takes old furniture and either sells it on or passes it to good causes. I mention it because it launched the magpie project, which it runs in partnership with Aberdeenshire Council and which is a scheme that aims to divert waste from landfill. It involves intercepting reusable household objects and furniture that are brought to the household waste and recycling centre in Aberdeenshire and then selling them or passing them on to local good causes. All too often, we do not see that part of the process. We see things going to the waste recycling centre and assume automatically that they will either go to landfill or somewhere else, but there are often small social enterprises that can deal with them. If such enterprises do not exist in other areas, we need to consider how to encourage local authorities or entrepreneurs to consider taking that approach to diverting waste. The magpie project was so successful that it had to relocate to new premises after only seven weeks, such was the demand. I do not dispute for one second that local concerns exist on waste incineration. We have heard them in the north-east, most recently in Peterhead, where an application caused a great deal of protest and was rejected by the local authority. However, we must be careful that we do not get into a situation in which we automatically rule out an approach to waste management that is based on particular examples. We have to be cautious in that regard. I urge members to consider the issue on a broad basis. There will always be local concerns, but we must have an eye on the bigger picture.

Sorry, no—it is a mistake.

17. To ask the Scottish Government how much it will cost to provide non-domiciled United Kingdom students with free university education. (S4O-00170)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the Scottish Government has had to react to the UK Government’s inexplicable decision to increase tuition fees throughout England and Wales and that those who suggest that either no fees or minimal fees should be applied need to explain how they would provide funding and what the impact would be on places for Scottish students?

What benefits does the cabinet secretary see coming from efforts to work with employers to ensure relevance of qualifications, and how does he see that process working in practice?

During last week’s debate on the legislative programme, I highlighted how vital the Government’s modern apprenticeships were and talked about how exciting the announcement of opportunities for all was. That remains the case; indeed, those issues have become even more vital and exciting with the details that have been set out this afternoon first in the Cabinet Secretary for Education’s statement and now by the Government in its economic strategy. This has been a fairly constructive debate. My only aside is to suggest that it is a little bit rich for Mr Baker to claim the credit for the modern apprenticeships, given that his party voted against the record number of such apprenticeships in the last budget.

As I said, it was merely an aside. I do not want to get into a protracted debate and discussion on it. I am sure that the Official Report will bear out the truth in that respect.

No. Again, my remark was merely an aside. I do not want to get into a protracted debate on it. The move towards a low-carbon economy not just in Scotland but internationally gives us a lot to be excited about and we must ensure that we are at the forefront of things. We have the opportunity to lead the way on that, and we have at our disposal the tools and resources for doing so. The Government has set itself eminently achievable but undoubtedly challenging targets on the decarbonisation of electricity generation—

Last week, Mr Findlay was rather unkind to me and told me rather curtly to sit down when I tried to intervene on him. I will be more polite and request merely that he reacquaint his posterior with the furniture. The targets to almost completely decarbonise road transport and to achieve significant decarbonisation of rail by 2050 are challenging, but they are targets that we must aspire to and which we must meet. I believe that, through investment and working with industry, we can achieve them. We must ensure that industry views the transition not as a cost burden but as an investment that will bring long-term benefits. In addition, we must look at the jobs that can be created as a result of our move to a low-carbon economy. We have spoken a lot about how we can create jobs to match the apprenticeships that we want to provide and to stimulate economic growth. We can do that by making the transition to a low-carbon economy, by providing support for the development of jobs in renewable energy—support that Scotland’s colleges have welcomed—and by creating hundreds of thousands of jobs to support offshore wind development and the other renewable developments that will come forward. These are exciting times. However, it is not enough just to have ambition—that has to be matched with action. The Government’s record on matching its ambition with action stands up to scrutiny. Over the past four years, the Government has consented to 42 renewable projects that will provide more than 2GW-worth of energy. That is matching ambition with action. More needs to be done to move to a low-carbon economy, not just as regards the creation of jobs and the need to improve our economic performance, although both of those are important; it is also important that we take steps to future-proof Scotland against increasingly volatile fuel and energy prices. If we are to protect ourselves from exposure to those variations, we must take steps to move towards a low-carbon economy. That will provide protection not just for vulnerable individuals but for vulnerable communities, particularly our rural communities, which will feel those increases in cost the hardest. The Government’s energy skills investment plan identified up to 95,000 job opportunities across the energy sector. To a member who represents the north-east of Scotland, where the energy sector is extremely prominent, that is welcome news. The energy sector there will have a key role to play as we move from a carbon-based, carbon-dependent economy towards a low-carbon economy. I note that the amendment of Patrick Harvie—who is not in the chamber—which was not selected for debate, said that economic growth and GDP were not the be-all and end-all, and I note the report by a number of organisations that looks at other ways of measuring improvements across Scotland. I fully agree that we should not base our final decision on whether Scotland as a nation has progressed and improved purely on the measurement of economic growth, but I think that it would be accepted that economic growth is fundamental to all the factors that have been identified, whether job satisfaction, economic security, education and training, income and wealth or crime in communities. They all have a direct link to economic growth, which is why the Government’s economic strategy is so crucial and so welcome. Although I do not disagree with the notion that we should not focus entirely on economic growth as measured by GDP as the barometer of success, it is fundamental and underpins everything. If we want to make Scotland a fairer, wealthier, happier and safer place, we must ensure that economic growth as measured by GDP is at the heart of what we do.

I referred to this in my speech. I accept entirely that there is more to life than just economic growth, but does Patrick Harvie not accept that economic growth underpins so many of the quality-of-life indicators that the briefing highlights, which is why we need to focus on it?

I am happy to advise the member and, indeed, all members in the chamber that, following discussions with the Government and the clerks, I will introduce a member’s bill on high hedges.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention?

Is the member seriously contending that, at a time when revenue budgets across the country are strained, we should take money from the revenue budget to fund capital rather than accessing proper borrowing powers for this Parliament?

1. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will seek international investment to support the dairy sector. (S4O-00112)

On Tuesday, at the national dairy event in Birmingham, NFU Scotland called for the sector to try to capture a share of the global dairy markets, which are growing and profitable. For example, India has more than doubled its quota for the import of skimmed and whole milk powders. Has the cabinet secretary held, or does he plan to hold, discussions with NFU Scotland on how the Scottish Government can assist its efforts to promote Scotland’s dairy sector on a global scale?

It is interesting that, during the election campaign, all the Opposition parties—I except Patrick Harvie—told us not to focus on a referendum on independence, but on the day-to-day governance of Scotland. Now, everybody wants to focus on a referendum on independence while we want to focus on the governance of Scotland and making Scotland better for our people. During the election campaign—with the exception of Patrick Harvie and the Greens—nobody wanted to have a referendum, but now everybody wants to have one; indeed, some folk even want to have two. It is now established that Moore’s law is opposed to people’s right to choose. If they get the right to choose and say “Yes”, they must be asked again to make sure that they said what they wanted to say in the first vote. The Government is committed to ensuring that Scotland improves and Scotland’s people are taken forward. I was therefore very disappointed by the party leaders’ contributions. Iain Gray made a diamond speech: it would have been more sparkly if he had cut it. Spending 14 minutes talking about the past four years does not do anything to move our country forward. I know that we have spoken about Scottish studies and a recognition of Scotland’s history, but that is not what we had in mind. Iain Gray and the Labour Party should focus on the future of Scotland and how to drive it forward rather than his spending the majority of a speech on the past and all the ways in which the Labour Party has held Scotland back. It is rather worrying that Annabel Goldie has never heard of Joseph Stiglitz, Christine Lagarde or Nouriel Roubini, and that she prefers to take her economic lessons from David Mundell and Danny Alexander. That is disappointing, but it probably explains a lot. The lesson of the eminent economists that I mentioned are salient: cutting too deep and too fast risks causing fatal damage to the economy. The rush to slash the deficit and pay off the debt risks disadvantaging and disillusioning huge swathes of society across the UK and Scotland. I could pay off the mortgage on my house if I wanted to over five or seven years, but my children would have no shoes. The same aspect exists in a rush to cut and pay off the debt in the UK. There undoubtedly needs to be fiscal responsibility, but I would wager that the UK Government is exercising fiscal irresponsibility in cutting too far too fast too soon.

I will not at this stage. I want to make a little progress. I agree with a lot of what Patrick Harvie said, but surely he accepts, whatever his views on corporation tax—whether he thinks that it should be raised, lowered or kept the same—that they are academic. Indeed, the previous Scotland Bill Committee, which was convened by Wendy Alexander, recommended that whatever one’s views on corporation tax, the power to change or control it should rest with the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government.

I will not right now. We have to consider ways in which we can increase capital spending. The UK Government’s short-sighted view on drastically slashing the amount of capital that is available risks stagnation and putting us back into a double dip. Major public and private sector projects depend on the availability of capital to invest in order to create jobs and boost sectors such as the construction industry. Reducing that by 40 per cent holds things back and prevents the creation of meaningful employment for people across society. The Government is committed to supporting young people into employment. In a tough jobs market, we must create the opportunities for young people to access employment. That is why the investment in record numbers of modern apprenticeships is vital and why what the opportunities for all initiative, which the First Minister has announced today, could deliver is extremely exciting. I eagerly await the cabinet secretary’s announcement on that.

We had the debate on the Scottish Futures Trust during the election campaign. The people of Scotland demonstrated that they are quite happy with the work that it is doing and are quite unhappy with the scaremongering of people such as James Kelly. Margo MacDonald rose— I apologise profusely to Margo MacDonald for not taking an intervention from her, which would have been 10 times better than James Kelly’s intervention. I will now take an intervention from her.

There has been nothing to suggest that if the UK Government had taken a different approach to the economic strategy, that would automatically have resulted in a loss of the triple A credit rating. That is far too often held up as a fear figure and as a straw man to prevent us from looking at the economic situation and establishing whether the action that is being taken is what actually needs to be done. We must see our young people—all our young people—as having potential, perhaps not simply in crude academic terms but in terms of potential to achieve and to contribute to Scotland’s future and to Scottish society. We should not write them off as a feral underclass or a lost cause. We have to ensure that as a Government we dig at the roots and pull the desperate, the vulnerable and the disadvantaged out of the slime that all too often sucks them down and prevents them from playing a meaningful role in society. That is why other aspects of the legislative programme, such as minimum pricing, which will prevent the situation from arising whereby someone can buy 10 times their recommended weekly allowance of alcohol for less than £20, will have a vital impact, because with the Scottish Government we see social justice in action, and with the UK Government we see inaction on social justice.

Does the member not accept that part of the reason behind the delay is, first, the fudging of the original route by the then transport minister Tavish Scott and, secondly, the fact that the Scottish Government cannot control the protests that have been made against the development?

Would the member not accept that the possibility of legislation being circumvented should not be an excuse not to legislate in the first place to tackle social ills?

I congratulate David Stewart on securing the debate. Every member across the chamber would echo the sentiment that the loss of young lives on our roads is a tragedy and something that we must do everything in our power to prevent. He spoke of the carnage on Highland roads. I come here as a North East Scotland member to say that the issue has been the cause of great concern in the Grampian area for a long time as well. Both the police and the fire service have done a great deal of work to try to educate young drivers—of which, more later. I am generally supportive of the graduated licence scheme. There is a need to be cautious in viewing one particular solution as a panacea, but I do not think that David Stewart is doing that. The Government undertook a survey of young drivers through the form of a national young drivers debate in October 2010, which looked at, among other things, the graduated driving licence scheme. Interestingly enough, the young people themselves were not very keen on it, and we can probably understand why—the potential restrictions to their driving. Over the summer, I attended an agricultural show and got talking to a driving instructor. He told me that he had discovered that fewer young people are putting themselves forward for pass plus than previously because they have found that insurance companies are no longer offering discounts to people who have pass plus because they do not see any differential in the accident rate between people who go through pass plus and people who do not. I do not know whether the statistics bear that out, but that is certainly what the insurance companies are saying. We have to ensure that we have the empirical evidence, and the study that David Stewart alluded to will certainly help to back up any argument. The issue around the insurance companies and their attitude to pass plus demonstrates that the question is one of not just driver skill but driver behaviour and attitudes. In that regard, I note that David Stewart’s motion makes mention of the sensible driving, always arriving scheme, which I assume is similar to the safe drive, stay alive campaign that exists in Grampian and, I think, other areas. The campaign gives schoolchildren a fairly graphic presentation about what happens when a young person loses control of their car due to poor driver behaviour. That brings home to the young people exactly what the consequences of their actions can be. Victims of car accidents and parents who have lost their children speak to the young people and tell them about the consequences. The young people are often visibly moved during the presentations. Presentations such as those have an important role to play alongside any measures that might be introduced. If we are going to tackle the issue, it is fine to do all we can to improve driving ability and perhaps remove night-time driving, but a reckless driver will be reckless during the daytime as well as at night, so we must ensure that the behavioural aspects are dealt with, too. I noted with interest that young males are most likely to die on our roads as a driver but, crucially, young females are most likely to die as the passenger of a young male. David Stewart spoke about the restrictions on passengers, and that issue needs to be looked at. We may need not a restriction on passengers but a requirement for a responsible older person to be in the car for a period after a driver has passed their test, in the same way as someone who is learning to drive can go out in a vehicle only if they have somebody of a responsible nature over a certain age in the car with them. I welcome the debate. There is a lot of discussion to be had, but at least we are having that discussion.

The cabinet secretary touched on the problems that will be posed by the budget exchange mechanism. Does he agree that the issue strengthens the case for Scotland to have full control of her finances, which would remove the need to enter into complex and technical negotiations with the UK Treasury and ensure that we had access to and control over our resources?

It is amazing what a kicking at the polls does to focus the mind on issues. I must be honest: I am sorry, but calls for us to suspend the blame game when the Labour Party, the Tories, the Liberal Democrats and the Greens bear the responsibility for the tram project frankly stink somewhat.

No, thank you—not at this moment. I spoke recently in the chamber about the Liberal Democrats going on the road to Damascus on minimum pricing. I appreciate that Kezia Dugdale has had a similar journey on the issue of the trams, and I welcome her turning to the call for a public inquiry. It is a great pity that it has required the pouring of £700 million into a hole in the ground for other parties to realise the folly of supporting the project in the first place.

Dear, oh dear. If that is the best that we are going to get, we are in for a long five years. I want to move on from that. At the end of the day, this Government was forced by the Opposition parties to allocate to the tram project £0.5 billion that could have been put to much more worthwhile capital investment projects in Scotland. Those parties will have to reckon with that, as they reckoned on polling day when the electorate delivered their verdict. That is why Malcolm Chisholm, to his great credit, is the last man standing for Labour in the city of Edinburgh, while the rest of the Labour Party candidates were given a good kicking at the polls.

No, thank you. I have only four minutes, and I have taken an intervention already. Let us look at a couple of issues in relation to the Aberdeen western peripheral route, which was spoken about earlier. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s confirmation that community benefit clauses will be included in the contract. They are extremely worth while, and it is great that my colleague Maureen Watt raised them and ensured that they are part of the contract. I echo Maureen Watt’s concerns about the protracted nature of the legal case that is taking place. I do not believe for one second that protesters should not have the opportunity to have their concerns heard, but there comes a point at any stage when people have to accept that their concerns have been given a proper airing. That was the stage at the public inquiry: people were given the opportunity to put across their views to the inquiry reporter, who then approved the project to continue. If we were talking about a sentencing taking as long as it is taking for a decision to be made in the judicial review, there would rightly be a public outcry on all sides of the chamber. We must ensure that major projects are not held up for an indeterminate time on that basis. I want to deal briefly with the bundling argument that Lewis Macdonald made. If we were to go ahead with the Haudagain roundabout project before the AWPR, we would create traffic chaos in Aberdeen. As the traffic displacement modelling shows, the AWPR requires to be in place before the Haudagain work proceeds.

I am sorry—I do not have time. Decoupling the roundabout from the project would not save any money; in fact, it would lead to further costs. Furthermore, because the AWPR needs to be in place before we can proceed with the roundabout, such a move would not benefit the traffic situation in the north-east. On housing, I very much welcome the abolition of the right to buy, as it redresses the housing balance in Scotland. For too long, we have been obsessed with private home ownership. There is undoubtedly a place for such ownership, but not to the extent that we lose social housing as a result, and I welcome the focus in that respect. Just for you, Presiding Officer, I will finish in less than my four minutes.

Will the member take an intervention?

I declare an interest as a member of the local government pension scheme. The cabinet secretary spoke of the need for re-engagement between those who are currently considering strike action and the UK Government. Does he agree that the recent remarks made by the Chief Secretary to the Treasury were at best naive and at worst inflammatory? Does he agree that perhaps Mr Alexander would benefit from a period of sombre reflection before he re-engages constructively with stakeholders?

I congratulate my colleague David Torrance on his maiden speech. It was a thoughtful contribution and I am sure that there will be more like it. I welcome the cabinet secretary back to his position. The comments that were made across rural Scotland during the election campaign showed that he was the unequivocal choice of rural Scotland for the position, so it is great that he is back. I also welcome Stewart Stevenson to his new role, which sees his return to the ministerial team. A number of members have commented on the wide range of the portfolio, and it is true that a number of different areas could be covered. I am not going to try to cover everything; I am going to look at a few key areas in which I have a particular interest. The first of those is resilience of rural communities—a point that I touched on in the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee this morning. Rural communities currently have a growing population and several rural local authorities are seeking to increase the housing in their areas through their structure plans. At the same time, some of those communities are suffering loss of services, whether through the loss of a post office or through the closure of a local bank branch or school. I therefore welcome the moratorium on rural school closures that was announced by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning. Rural communities also find themselves struggling because of inequality of service. For example, if someone who lives in a rural community orders something online, they often have to pay a rural premium of £15 or £20 on top of the price of the product to have it delivered, even if they are located just a short distance from an urban area. Such things can cause great difficulties for our rural communities. The challenge is to ensure that we create vibrant communities in our rural areas and to make them not just places where people live but have to go elsewhere to access services. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments about the focus on community empowerment and the creation of more confident and vibrant communities. In a previous speech in the chamber, I mentioned a community in the north-east that is set to benefit from its own renewables scheme. Udny is set to benefit from a community wind turbine to the tune of £4 million to £5 million over a 20-year period. Similar things are happening in other communities throughout rural Scotland, and we should try to encourage such developments to ensure that communities benefit and are empowered. Another key area to focus on is food and drink. I very much welcome the additional funding that the cabinet secretary has announced today. Within the food and drink sector, we must ensure that retailers are not just selling Scottish products on their shelves but are actively promoting Scottish products as premium products. Beyond that, we should be guaranteeing a fair deal for producers. A commitment was given that an adjudicator would be introduced to look at the “Groceries Supply Code of Practice” and to ensure a fair deal for producers, but the UK Government has not yet honoured that commitment. We must keep the pressure on it to follow through on that commitment to ensure that producers are getting a fair deal. All too often, it is the producers who feel the pinch in terms of the prices that they are paid. We should not be parochial when it comes to Scottish produce—we should not promote it just to Scottish people through retailers; we should also take up the international opportunities that exist to take Scotland the brand overseas and capture the market. There are a number of fine examples of Scottish companies in the food and drink sector that have captured a large slice of that international market. At a recent Scottish Enterprise briefing that I attended, Dean’s of Huntly was mentioned as an example. Dean’s has captured a significant contract in the United States, and it has recently been promoted in the Gulf, via Scottish Enterprise. I welcome the efforts that the cabinet secretary made in the previous session to reintroduce the haggis to the United States of America. I hope that he will find success in that regard. Zero waste and landfill diversion are important not only from an environmental point of view, but from a financial point of view, particularly for local authorities, many of which face the prospect of significant increases in landfill tax burdens if they do not take urgent action to reduce the amount of waste that is sent to landfill. In Aberdeen, we have taken the decision to introduce the co-mingling of garden and food waste, so that people can now recycle their food waste with their garden waste as it is sent to be composted. That has significantly boosted recycling rates in Aberdeen and, crucially, it has reduced the amount of waste that is sent to landfill and the amount of rubbish that people put in their bins. The variation in recycling across local authorities needs to be carefully considered—not just the recycling rate, but what can be recycled. There is often variation—even between neighbouring authorities—in what can be recycled by householders. To boost recycling rates, we need to find a way to allow neighbouring authorities to share recycling or to encourage other items to be recycled where there are opportunities to do so. I welcome the progress that was made during the previous session and I look forward to the progress that will be made this session. In particular, I look forward to what the Government will be introducing by way of proposed legislation.

When the member reads the Official Report of this morning’s Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, he will see that the cabinet secretary referred to the Brian Pack report. It is very much still on the Scottish Government’s agenda.

Does Helen Eadie accept that the amount of money that is raised through the licence fee in Scotland is much greater than that which is returned to Scotland and that there is therefore a perfectly justifiable argument that more of that money should come to Scotland to fund broadcasting?

I am disappointed to note that there are no members from the Liberal Democrats in the chamber because I was hoping that I could put to them the suggestion that we dedicate a couple of programmes in the digital Scottish network to them, namely “Total Wipeout” followed by “Party of Five”. Nonetheless, I am sure that their absence from the chamber in no way diminishes their dedication to the cultural agenda in Scotland or their devotion to the establishment of a Scottish digital network. We need to ensure that we shake off some of the cringe that all too often dominates our attitude to Scottish televisual and cultural output. I have to be honest and say that that cringe emerged somewhat during Helen Eadie’s contribution when she spoke about low production values and discount programming. That is unhelpful, because all too often, we have an entirely unjustified cringe about productions that come out of Scotland. We need to celebrate more what we do culturally and our televisual output.

I would like to make some progress, but I thank both members for taking an interest. I am glad that Ruth Davidson has lost none of the characteristic feistiness that she used to show when we debated against each other at university. I note a certain irony in the fact that a member of the party that advocates competition in almost every facet of public life is concerned about the prospect of a little competition for the BBC. Competition in broadcasting is to be encouraged and could be healthy. With that in mind, I reiterate my point to Helen Eadie that there is a deficit in Scotland’s share of the licence fee. Scotland puts about £300 million into the licence fee pot; according to 2008-09 figures, we received less than half of that back. Even if we take into consideration the fact that a Scottish digital network would cost in the region of £75 million to establish, that still leaves £80 million to £85 million unclaimed, as it were, for Scottish output.

I am not for one second suggesting that what I propose should necessarily be done on a purely pro rata basis, but what we pay in we should at the very least expect back, whether or not that is done on a pro rata basis. I do not disagree with the member that the roll-out of high-speed broadband, particularly in rural areas, is to be welcomed. Indeed, at yesterday’s meeting of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, we highlighted the roll-out of rural broadband as something that we want to focus on. It is great that the Government is investing via mechanisms such as the next generation digital fund, but we have to ensure that, following that investment and the establishment of the infrastructure, the service providers match that by providing services along those lines, and at a reasonable rate, so that people can afford to access services via broadband. There has been some talk about television programmes’ often UK-centric editorial positions—they do not always take account of the different flavours of devolution that exist in the UK. Ruth Davidson was perhaps a little too harsh on Joan McAlpine in relation to her suggestion that, all too often, the focus does not take account of Scotland. There can be no better example of that than that of our Deputy First Minister being chastised on “Question Time” for referring, in Glasgow, to a specific Scottish issue and being told that she should not do so because a wider UK audience was watching the debate. That happened even though, week after week, the programme features discussions on areas that are devolved to this Parliament, such as health, and speakers are at no point told that they should remember that there are viewers watching the programme in Scotland. We have to ensure that, when editorial focus on Scotland is required, we can reflect that. We can do so through a Scottish digital network, which might enable more Scotland-focused political programming. That could be more accessible to the Scottish people on a regular basis, as opposed to the occasional arrival in Scotland of “Question Time” or other such UK programmes for a discussion of political events. I hope that that approach can be considered. Local television output has been mentioned. As I am a north-east MSP, people might expect me to start banging the drum to bring back Grampian Television, but I will not do that at this stage. It is important to note that local television and radio have served as an important nurturing ground for future talent, which moves on elsewhere. For example, Isla Traquair started on Grampian Television and eventually moved to Channel 5, and I understand that Ruth Davidson made a transition from Kingdom FM to the Tory front bench. From such small acorns do large oaks grow. It is important that we recognise that talent exists in Scotland, and we need to ensure that we develop and nurture that talent. There is talent not only in front of the camera or behind the microphone but in the back rooms, among the production staff, make-up artists, writers and so on. We have to try to create opportunities for Scottish talent to be retained—but not necessarily kept—in Scotland and at least to be given the opportunity to develop. The more opportunities that we can provide for young talented people to get into the industry and develop themselves at an early stage—and then look to move on elsewhere, if that is what they wish to do—the better. I think that the Scottish digital network provides that opportunity.

I will not rehearse the point that I made about the inequality between the licence fee that is paid in from Scotland and the money that comes back. Is the member suggesting that, if the money to set up the Scottish digital network were to be taken from the licence fee, the BBC would take the money exclusively from the funding for BBC Scotland rather than from across the BBC or from the share that is paid in from Scotland at the moment?

I would never assert any superiority complex for Scottish programming. I simply suggested that the cringe that we often have—the feeling that, because something has been produced and output from Scotland, it is inferior—does not apply. That was my point, not the one that Ken Macintosh describes.

I thank the members on all sides of the chamber who have signed the motion that I lodged. This is a topical and relevant debate. Although this Parliament has no direct locus in North Sea taxation, it is incumbent on us to speak in support of an industry that is vital for so many jobs and for our nation’s economy. In drafting the motion, I tried my best to construct a consensus approach on the issue. This Parliament has form in coming together on a reserved issue, as we saw in the previous session with regard to the Moray air bases. In that debate members on all sides of the chamber recognised that the decision that was being taken at Westminster would have a dramatic and devastating impact on communities in Scotland, and they united behind the campaign. With that in mind, I particularly welcome Alison McInnes’s support for my motion. Although her party is part of the Government in London, I recognise that she perhaps does not agree entirely with the decision that has been taken. I therefore want to avoid making this a political debate, and I hope that we can focus instead on looking at things from an industry perspective and work together on that basis. I mentioned the Moray air bases, but I recognise that the impact that we are talking about in this case is on a different scale. However, there is still deep concern over the changes to the supplementary charge and the ramifications for the industry. The decision to increase the supplementary charge from 20 to 32 per cent came as something of a bolt from the blue for the industry. There was no prior consultation or any indication that it was going to happen. Indeed, in the build-up to the budget, the industry received conciliatory noises from the Treasury that it would remain unaffected as a result of the budget process. That can lead one to assume only that it was a last-minute decision by the Treasury, rather than some sort of long-term plan. The very last thing that the energy and offshore oil industry needs is short-term, knee-jerk decision making, as opposed to long-term, strategic planning in consultation with the industry. The decision has two impacts. There is a direct impact on the companies that are being taxed, and an impact through disincentivising investment. That affects not only new-field production, but those companies that specialise in extracting from the harder-to-reach and older fields. The higher rate of taxation applies to those older fields irrespective of whether the company is newly exploiting them or has been doing so for a long time. There is also a secondary impact. Often, when the argument is taken to the public they will say, “Why should we feel sympathy for oil companies that are making large profits?” I understand their argument in some cases, but not every company that operates in the offshore sector is making large profits, as evidenced by the downturn in investment as a result of the decision. The secondary impact that we must bear in mind relates to the supply chain, which depends on investment in the oil industry. There are a lot of small companies in the north-east of Scotland that depend on investment in the oil and gas sector for their future business. It is therefore just as important and imperative for those companies that the decision is re-examined as it is for the majors and the companies that operate offshore. With that in mind, I welcome the approach that the Scottish Government has taken on the issue. There has been no foghorn diplomacy: a constructive approach has been taken, which is to be welcomed. The approach has been to offer alternatives to the Treasury with regard to how it could tax the offshore sector differently while increasing the confidence of the sector. That confidence is important. Goldman Sachs published a document in May 2011 that provided insights into European oil and gas fiscal regimes. It said in its analysis that “fiscal stability has been key to encourage exploration and innovation ... Low taxes clearly encourage activity: Our production forecasts in major new fields ... has increased 127% since 2006 in countries with a below-average tax rate vs. only 63% in above-average tax regimes. More tellingly, we have increased our forecast for countries with a stable or falling tax take by 150%, compared to a 19% fall in countries which have increased taxes over the same period.” I do not oppose the concept of taxation on profit or, indeed, taxation on the sector; neither does the sector. The sector is asking for stability and consultation, neither of which demands is unreasonable. With that in mind, I brought this debate to the chamber. When the United Kingdom Government looks at the submission from the Scottish Government—built on the work of Professor Alex Kemp and Linda Stephen in their paper that was produced in April 2011—I hope that it will conclude that what is required is a rethink on the issue. I hope that the UK Government will take another look at the taxation that is being levied on the industry and at the ways in which the Government can encourage and stimulate investment so that the potential for future jobs and economic benefits is not lost further down the line. More important, we do not want the many small businesses in the north-east that depend for continuing business on the oil industry and continuing investment in it to have to sit and worry about what will happen to them in three, four or five years’ time. I hope, perhaps forlornly, that we can get cross-party consensus on the issue. I will wait to see what the Conservative members say on the matter. They have not yet signed my motion, although they may have thought that a sort of bear trap was being set for them—I assure them that it was not. I would be more than happy if they changed their tone and signed the motion after the debate. I would welcome them with open arms. I hope that we can build cross-party consensus on the issue and send the message that the oil and gas sector needs stability. I welcome very much the Government’s approach.

Will the member give way?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. We north-easterners are famous for being tight, so you do not need to worry on that score. I have a couple of interests to declare. Through my membership of Aberdeen City Council, I am the vice-convener of Grampian joint fire board—for the time being at least—and my brother-in-law is a retained firefighter and member of the Fire Brigades Union. Alison McInnes mentioned police reform. It is unwise for the Liberal Democrats to continue to cast up that issue, especially given that the main plank of the Liberal Democrats 2011 election campaign in the north-east was to “save local policing” from the SNP. I remind Alison McInnes that every constituency in the north-east is now represented by an SNP MSP and that there are no Liberal Democrat constituency MSPs. Undeterred by that, the Liberal Democrats used that line again during the by-election in Dyce—the ward that I represent on Aberdeen City Council. The Liberal Democrats previously held the seat and this time they received a princely 11 per cent of the vote. I gently suggest to Alison McInnes that it might be time for the Liberal Democrats to get the message on police reform. As a local councillor, I have spent a large amount of time with police officers on the beat in my ward, observing them and their work. It is phenomenally depressing to spend time on the beat with police officers during a weekend, because the majority, if not the entirety, of the work that they do in such a community is picking up drunk kids and returning them to their parents. It is unfortunate that so many young folk still find that the only acceptable thing for them to do of a weekend is to go out and get blootered. I commend the work that the cabinet secretary and his department are doing, and will continue to do, to advocate the case for minimum pricing, because that undoubtedly will have an impact. Those kids are getting drunk not on premium-priced products but on ridiculously low-priced booze. Until we tackle that point, we will continue to have to pick up those young folk. In that regard, I sound a conciliatory note to the Liberal Democrats, who have got the message on minimum pricing. When Willie Rennie spoke in the chamber about leading his troops towards the sound of gunfire, I did not realise that that meant that he would take them on the road to Damascus. Nevertheless, they have got the message on minimum pricing and I warmly welcome that. I also welcome the work that cashback for communities is doing across the north-east and, indeed, the rest of the nation. It is putting a large amount of money into diversionary activities and is supporting the work of a number of groups and organisations to harness and develop the potential of young people, rather than leave it to be squandered and wasted, as so often happened in our communities. I will focus now on the fire service reforms, which have not been dealt with to any great extent so far. As I mentioned, I have served on Grampian joint fire board. There was a debate about the reforms that were to take place and although there was not unanimity on exactly what the outcome of the consultation should be, there was unanimity—we unanimously agreed our response to Government—on the fact that reform was needed, that the current system was not fit for purpose and that there was a need to look very carefully at what we do with our fire service. In addition, it was clear that where local specialisms and centres of excellence exist, we need to look at whether those can be retained and worked into any reform that takes place. I highlight the urban search and rescue specialism that exists in Grampian. A team from Grampian that specialises in urban search and rescue was heavily involved in the relief efforts following the earthquake in New Zealand, and I put on record my commendation for its hard work in that situation. I will deal briefly with the response of the Fire Brigades Union to the consultation, which—handily for today’s debate—appeared in my mail just this week. In response to question 10, which was “which option do you think should be pursued and why?”, the available answers to which were single service or regional structure, the FBU opted for single service. In doing so, it stated: “In principle we could support both options with the correct governance and management structures, but this is subject to there being satisfactory arrangements on the areas highlighted above. We believe that both arrangements could deliver safe communities and fire service employment protection; provided there are clear and distinct responsibilities invested in the regional structures to deliver risk based emergency cover within each region, to an agreed and consistent National Standard. Of the two options, we consider that this would be easier to deliver within a single structure.” I welcome the involvement of the FBU because its members are the people on the front line—they are the life savers. I do not believe for one second that those dedicated firefighters would support or endorse a proposal that would lead to risks to the public. Ultimately, people in our communities are less concerned about what the badge that their emergency service personnel wear says than about the fact that they are there, that they are visible and that they are working for them in their communities. That is my priority, I know that it is the priority of the cabinet secretary and the Government, and it should be a priority for us all.

Does the member accept the point that the private sector is good in some areas but there are other areas in which profit-driven motivation is neither required nor beneficial?

I begin by declaring a number of interests. First, I am a member of Aberdeen City Council and, secondly, my grandmother is a dementia sufferer and my mother is her carer. I welcome the focus on this vital issue, which has had a great deal of prominence in the media lately due to the high-profile cases that have been mentioned in previous speeches. I want to mention the Mrs V case because Dundee falls within my region, North East Scotland. My colleague Joe FitzPatrick rightly said in yesterday afternoon’s debate that it was a situation that should never have occurred and should never happen again. Every member would echo that. With that in mind, I very much welcome the publication last year of the national dementia strategy, which addressed many of the points that that case raised, although the case took place a couple of years before the strategy was introduced. I know that many people working in the care sector as unpaid carers and indeed as professionals very much welcome the emphasis that is contained in the strategy. Aberdeen City Council, on which I serve, has recognised the changing demography and the need to align budget provision accordingly. That is why, at its most recent budget meeting, the council took the decision to put an additional £7 million into the social care budget. In future years, the council will focus on elderly care, because we recognise that pressures will come from that as a result of the demographic statistics, which Jackie Baillie and my colleague George Adam highlighted. The point of putting such money into social care services is to transform them early so that they are prepared not only for the demographic challenges but for the financial challenges that will follow. I am sure that members appreciate that what matters is not always the money that is put in but what the service that is in place delivers for people. I invite members with a keen interest in the integration of health and social care to visit the Rosewell house care home in Aberdeen, which Aberdeen City Council and Grampian NHS Board operate and fund jointly. The home provides respite and rehabilitation beds and is an example of good practice in working together between the health board and the council. Perhaps that could be considered as a model for elsewhere in Scotland. Several members have touched on unpaid carers, on which I will focus for the remainder of my speech. Next week is carers week, and it is important to recognise the invaluable role that carers play in society. I very much welcome the support for carers in Scotland that the Government, the cabinet secretary and her team have provided in recent times. Much carer support is being provided and that is very much welcomed. I also welcome the sharing of personal experiences today by my colleague Fiona McLeod and by Mary Fee. That brings it home to us that, across the chamber, we have much personal as well as professional experience of the situations that are faced in our communities. Fiona McLeod was right to highlight the iniquity of the carers allowance that Westminster provides. It is less than £60 per week, and many carers who receive it do not have the benefit—which my mother has—of having a working partner who can support them beyond that £60 per week. When James Purnell was the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, my colleague Brian Adam wrote to ask him to look at the allowance with a view to uplifting it. Unfortunately, the response was that the carers allowance is not a wage. I do not dispute that but, to qualify for the allowance, a person’s working hours and the amount that they can earn per annum are restricted. My mother cared for my grandfather when he was alive, so she cared for two elderly people. I know that a number of people care for multiple relatives rather than just one relative. However, such carers are eligible for only one carers allowance payment. With only that payment, it is difficult for many people who have no supplementary income from another family member to provide acceptable care and to deliver other services when caring for more than one relative. As a Parliament and as the Government, we must lobby Westminster hard to ensure that the carers allowance does not become a Cinderella benefit that is left out of the overall welfare reforms that are being considered. I welcome the fact that the allowance is not being absorbed into the universal credit, but radical and urgent reform is needed to ensure that it provides the assistance that carers require it to provide. Unfortunately, carers in Scotland and across the UK ask for little, which is exactly what Westminster gives them.

Many small rural schools—some with no more than 20 pupils—achieve excellent results and obtain glowing reports from HMIE inspections. Does the cabinet secretary agree that the quality of the education provision at those schools overrides the often spurious argument that children will make more friends at a bigger school, which is put forward by those who seek to close small schools?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. You caught me slightly on the hop as I was not expecting to be called quite so soon, but there we go. I begin by congratulating my colleague Marco Biagi on securing his first, and indeed this session’s first, members’ business debate. Some people will be asking why this man from the north-east is speaking in a debate that relates to locating the green investment bank in Edinburgh. Marco Biagi summed it up well at the end of his speech when he said that the bank would benefit the whole of Scotland, not just Edinburgh, and the north-east obviously has a particular interest. Aberdeen—and the north-east in general—is the base of the offshore sector and is widely regarded as Europe’s oil capital and offshore energy capital. A great number of transferable skills in the industry can directly transfer to the renewables sector. In my maiden speech, I alluded to the importance of keeping as much money in and flowing around the Scottish economy as possible. I used the example of a community scheme in Aberdeenshire where, sadly, the money had to be borrowed from overseas to finance a project. Anything that can be done to keep money circulating in the Scottish economy should be done. We in Aberdeen have acute experience of dealings with Whitehall when it comes to financing for energy. I invite Marco Biagi and anyone else to speak to some of the key players in the offshore industry in Aberdeen about the dealings that they have had. They are not always entirely complimentary, so anything that we can do to bring the decision making in finance much closer to where the action will be is entirely appropriate. I therefore commend Marco Biagi for his approach. I recognise and understand that a large number of members will want to contribute, some of them with a much greater geographical proximity to Marco Biagi’s constituency and the location itself. However, I think that it is important that we send a message that this issue is not just Edinburgh focused but Scotland-wide.

Absolutely, but the key point is that we want to headquarter as much of the renewables market, including the investment bank, here in Scotland. We are undoubtedly the nation that will lead the way in renewable energy. Before Kezia Dugdale intervened, I was just about to say that all too often in Scotland we can be tribal between our cities, with different cities claiming right over other cities. However, this is one issue on which we as a nation can unite. All cities in Scotland can unite behind Edinburgh’s case because it will be to their benefit.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Having congratulated you privately on your elevation to the role, I do so publicly today. Like Kezia Dugdale last week, Mark Griffin spoke today about his unexpected election to Parliament. I share that feeling, although they probably at least turned up to the count in appropriate attire. Nonetheless, I am delighted to be elected, and I am grateful to the 140,000 people who voted SNP in the list in North East Scotland and returned me as a list member. Having been born in Inverurie, raised in Aberdeen and attended university in Dundee, I have spent my entire life in the North East region. It is a wonderful corner of the world, and it is a great honour and privilege to represent the area. I hope that I will do the people who sent me here justice by representing them to the best of my ability. I welcome the inclusion of local ownership in the motion and in the Labour amendment. Sadly, it is missing from the Tory amendment, but then so is ambition. Sarah Boyack spoke about energy efficiency in relation to housing. My colleague Kevin Stewart rightly pointed out the success of Aberdeen Heat and Power. As a member of Aberdeen City Council, I had the privilege of opening two Tenants First Housing Co-operative properties that use a model of housing from Canada known as Super E housing, which is an extremely energy-efficient form of housing that significantly reduces household heating bills. I spoke to Alex Neil about that when he was the Minister for Housing and Communities, and I fully intend to raise with Keith Brown, the new Minister for Housing and Transport, the issue whether that housing model could be considered for future new build in the social and private sectors in Scotland. On Tuesday, along with a number of other members, I attended a thought-provoking and robust discussion event that was organised by Friends of the Earth Scotland at the Holyrood hotel. At that event, I met two gentlemen from Udny Community Wind Turbine Company, Brian McDougall and Mike MacDonald. For those who are unfamiliar with the community of Udny, the parish of Udny lies 15 miles north-west of Aberdeen and consists mainly of the villages of Pitmedden and Udny Green and surrounding rural properties. It has a population of roughly 2,000. In 2006, the idea of a wind turbine to provide a sustainable, long-term income for the community was promoted at a community council meeting and taken forward by a small group of individuals. They investigated and selected a site, and they engaged with the community, including the schools. The schools in the area were brought in to develop models for a “planning for real” event, and the enthusiasm of the community was captured—so much so that a ballot on whether to proceed with a community wind turbine showed 91 per cent support for the project. The decision was made to sell the electricity generated by the turbine to the National Grid and to form a community trust company, which would disburse the funds generated by the sale. It is estimated that, over the next 20 years, the project could raise as much as £4 million to £5 million for that small community. That is a fantastic opportunity for the people of Udny, and I very much hope that they will realise it. The likelihood is that the turbine will go live later this month. It has required five years of hard work and dedication by the people of that community, and they deserve significant commendation for their work. But—and there are always buts—there have been some concerns, not directly with the Scottish Government, necessarily, but in areas that we might need to raise with others if we are to encourage more communities to develop projects in the future and if we are to make it easier for them to do so. The first of those areas is how communities deal with HM Revenue and Customs. A request was made by the community that I have highlighted—a fairly sensible request, I thought—to engage in monthly accounting, which would make things easier for the community in paying invoices and dealing with VAT. That request was refused, and the people were told that they had to proceed on a quarterly basis. I find that a little bit obstructive, and not in the spirit of encouraging such projects. The second area involves lending. The loan that the community took out to develop the project comes from the Triodos Bank, in the Netherlands. There were only three banks that the community could look to for finance. One was the Clydesdale, which, unfortunately, was not able to take on the project at the time. The other was the Co-operative Bank, which was unable to do so either. The Triodos Bank, for which the community had nothing but the highest praise, took on the project. It would be beneficial, however, to retain the money within the Scottish economy. Perhaps the minister can see what he can do to encourage other banks to lend to such projects. In 2006, the people of Udny showed vision and ambition. After five years of hard work and dedication, their community is set to reap significant rewards. In 2011, Scotland showed that it has vision and ambition by re-electing the SNP to government on the back of our ambitious targets for renewable energy generation. Let us all work together in the Parliament to ensure that, in five years’ time, the people and communities of Scotland are the ones who reap the rewards.

Does Liz Smith share my concern at the shortage of new referees coming into grass-roots football? Will she welcome the work that the Government and the SFA are doing on discipline? The professionals who hound and harass referees in games set a bad example and put people off going into refereeing at the grass-roots level.

Having made my maiden speech this morning, I begin this speech by congratulating my colleagues from across the chamber on making their maiden speeches this afternoon. I echo the comments of other members who have commented on the high standard of speeches. I might not always agree with the content, but the standard of the speeches that have been given is exemplary. I begin by referring to something that Dr Simpson said. He referred to curling, and I recommend that he visit the fantastic, state-of-the-art Curl Aberdeen facility. The European curling championships were recently hosted in Aberdeen, and compliments were given by competitors on the standard of the facility. I must sound a slightly down note, however: on coming into power on Aberdeen City Council, the SNP had to invest £1 million in the Linx ice arena in order to hold those championships and to bring the arena up to the required standard. That was due to an unfortunate legacy of neglect and underinvestment under previous Labour, Lib Dem and Tory administrations. During the election campaign, I had the great privilege of visiting the Granite City amateur boxing club in Aberdeen, which is the home of the Aberdeen assassin, Lee McAllister, a world and Commonwealth boxing champion. The club’s work in providing a focus for young people is excellent. It is about not only developing potentially elite athletes for the future but providing diversionary activity of the sort that members mentioned. Boxing is one of the sports that take children from poorer backgrounds, in particular, who might otherwise find themselves going down the wrong path, and help to give them a constructive outlet for their energies. The club is searching for funding to try to develop new facilities so that it can encourage more female members to join the club, because there has been an uptake in interest in female boxing. I look forward to working with the club and other colleagues in the north-east to try to secure that funding. I am pleased that the minister talked about action on youth football, which is close to my heart. Before I was elected, I worked as a football coach for a youth team in Aberdeen. When I intervened during Liz Smith’s speech, I mentioned the acute problem that there is in attracting new people to referee in football, because the problems that are often seen in the professional game put people off. I very much welcome the minister’s comments about looking at disciplinary structures at the SFA and the work in which the Scottish Government and the SFA have been engaged, which will help to remove some of the problems in getting people involved in refereeing. Summer football needs to be considered in the context of how the youth game goes forward. The previous chief executive of the SFA, Gordon Smith, was keen on a shift to summer football in Scotland, as has happened in Ireland and many Scandinavian nations. Summer football has been piloted in the women’s game and should be looked at for the youth game. From my youth coaching experience, I can say that it is difficult to teach kids the basics of passing, moving and so on in December, January and February, when the weather is bad and pitches are of a poor standard and do not lend themselves to the development of key skills. There is also a need to look at youth development by professional clubs. The Public Petitions Committee considered the issue during the previous session of the Parliament and the minister has taken an interest in the matter. I spoke recently to the president of Dyce Boys Club FC, where I used to coach, about a fact-finding mission to Sweden by one of the club’s coaches. The coach had looked at the system at IFK Gothenburg, where if a child joins at the age of 11 or 12 they are given a firm commitment and a guarantee that they will be at the club until they are 16. For too many young players who go to professional clubs in Scotland, the guarantee lasts only until the next game. Very often, players are released mid season or at the end of the season. That is not always a problem in and of itself, given that we accept that football is a difficult profession in which to succeed; the problem is to do with getting a link back to the grass-roots club. If a player who has gone to a professional club is released, there needs to be some form of interaction between the professional club and the grass-roots level, to encourage the player back into the game at grass-roots level and get them picked up by another club. When clubs let players go, we must ensure that the players do not fall too far and land too hard. There is hope for young players in the example of Paul Coutts. He did not initially make it as a professional but went to play in the Highland Football League, for Cove Rangers FC, in the south of Aberdeen. He was spotted by scouts from a number of English football clubs and was signed by Peterborough United FC—by Darren Ferguson, the son of Sir Alex. When Darren Ferguson became manager of Preston North End FC, he took Paul Coutts with him—Paul is still at Preston North End and has won a number of under-21 caps for Scotland. There is hope for a lot of young players who do not make the cut the first time round. They should not be afraid to go to the junior or Highland league clubs, because there are professional clubs out there who look at the young players in those leagues and try to get them back into the professional game. I very much welcome the support that the Government has provided for grass-roots sport via the cashback for communities scheme and the young Scots fund. Let us rightly celebrate our top sportspeople, but let us also welcome the Government’s moves to invest in the development of the elite sportspeople through grass-roots sport.