Does James Kelly agree that the innovative solution of extending the platforms at Queen Street station so that we do not need so many trains or such fancy signalling should be better for the environment and is a win all round?

There are a number of measures in the budget that we can all be positive about, including some topical ones. They include free school meals for primaries 1 to 3, the extension of childcare, and the most recent move to cover the bedroom tax. I accept that the bedroom tax is at the top of the political agenda and is probably the highest-profile item; it is certainly being debated widely today. If we can resolve that situation, a lot of people will be happy. However, we should not lose sight of other aspects of welfare reform that are hitting my constituents and, I assume, those of other members. They include some strange decisions on fitness for work, which my colleague Christina McKelvie mentioned, when persons who are clearly not fit for work are told that they are. Another thing that my constituents face is the imposition, for doubtful reasons, of sanctions whereby people are suddenly left with no income at all. It is clear that neither the Scottish Government nor the Scottish Parliament is able to mitigate those or other aspects of welfare reform, because other services would have to suffer seriously in compensation. To have control over the full welfare budget and the related rules and regulations surely has to be a top priority for Parliament as we move forward. I would be interested to hear from the other parties whether they can guarantee that, if Scotland were to vote no in September, they would be able to transfer welfare powers to this Parliament, under devolution. It strikes me that this is—I presume—the last budget in which we will deal almost exclusively with expenditure. Next year, we will be thinking about taxation—the landfill tax and the land and buildings transaction tax—and the year after that we will consider at the very least a share of income tax. It is worth remembering that we can all agree that a responsible grown-up Parliament should have responsibility for taxation and expenditure. We will have ample opportunity to discuss raising taxes in the future. The Finance Committee is looking at the Revenue Scotland and Tax Powers Bill, which I find fascinating. Professor James Mirrlees was at the Finance Committee’s meeting this morning. He takes a very high-level view of tax systems. In the lengthy Mirrlees review, he refers to a number of features of a good tax system and compares them with the current UK tax system. In one table that I found particularly interesting, under the heading “Taxes on earnings”, he said that a good tax system has “A progressive income tax with a transparent and coherent rate structure”, whereas the current UK system has “An opaque jumble of different effective rates as a result of tapered allowances and a separate National Insurance system”. We do not look much at the taxes that we raise, so I am putting down a marker to the effect that I hope that, when we come to next year’s budget and our first discussions of tax as part of a budget, the Scottish Parliament will do better than the UK has, so far. One tax over which we have some influence is council tax, so I will mention it; I particularly welcome the council tax freeze. Council tax is a bad tax to start with because it does not take into account ability to pay; for example, pensioners who stay in the same house after they retire see the cost carrying on as before, despite their income being reduced. If councils increase council tax, people who are struggling get hit even harder. Some people have said that they are relaxed about increasing the council tax. I wonder who they are. Some of them are people who earn a lot, which might include some of us. Council tax is easy for them and for people on low incomes who perhaps pay no council tax. Some of them would like the freeze to stop and more services to be provided, but what about the people who are just coping and no more? I reckon that a number of them are in constituencies such as mine. They are ordinary decent hard-working people who have not had a pay increase for a while, and whose hours might have been cut. They face the fact that most costs are rising with inflation and, in the case of energy costs, that they are rising much faster than inflation. It can make a real difference to those people that their council tax has been frozen, so I very much welcome the freeze continuing. At the risk of repeating last week’s debate on the Commonwealth games, I will say how much I value the capital expenditure in the budget in the past, the present and the future. What a difference that spending has made to the east end of Glasgow. In preparation for the sports at the games, we have the Emirates arena, the Tollcross pool upgrade and the hockey centre. They have all provided construction jobs, on-going jobs for local people and facilities for local people. I keep returning to housing. Linked to the Commonwealth games is the tremendous boost that will come through the games village, which is providing jobs, improving the area—as many people know, it has struggled—and providing high-quality homes for local people. I also very much welcome transport investment, which is providing jobs in construction and making it easier for people to travel to jobs. We saw that with the M74 completion, and we now have the commitment of some £415 million—I believe that that is less than the original budget—for the M8, M73 and M74 motorway improvements. That is very welcome for jobs. I very much welcome the budget. Of course, if we were not subsidising Westminster to the extent that we are, we would have more resources here with which to do more. However, that is—sadly—not currently the case. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on the balance that he has achieved with tight resources.

I emphasise that amendment 25 and other amendments that I have lodged are intended to strengthen the protections for those who disagree—who, frankly, will continue to disagree—with same-sex marriage. Other members may speak against the bill in principle, but that is not my intention, whatever my personal beliefs. The words “strengthening” and “protection” can seem a bit subjective, but that is where we are. We are not at zero per cent protection, nor are we or can we be at 100 per cent. We are all trying to anticipate what the courts may or may not decide in the years ahead. I accept that the Government has made attempts to build in safeguards on what is a very controversial issue, but I would argue that we could make some improvements. In other legislation, we have seen a degree of accommodation by the Government, which has been very welcome—for example, in the Freedom of Information (Amendment) (Scotland) Act 2013 and in the current budget bill. Surely, some flexibility today would show that Parliament is listening to the public. Some of my amendments—for example, amendments 26 and 27—might gain greater support than others, but for now we are looking at amendment 25. Amendment 25 is based on an amendment that was accepted by the United Kingdom Government during the passage of the Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Act 2013. Section 10 of the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill proposes a new section 8(1D) of the Marriage (Scotland) Act 1977, which refers to no duty being imposed by specific proposed new subsections of the 1977 act. By contrast, the Westminster protection is broader, referring to no person being “compelled by any means” —that is the key phrase— “including by the enforcement of a contract or a statutory or other legal requirement”. The aim of amendment 25 is not to remove the “no duty imposed” terminology but to bolster it by putting in the additional protection of a person not being “compelled by any means”. That is to give protection for the religious liberty and rights of conscience of those groups and individuals who do not wish to participate in same-sex marriages. The “by any means” terminology should cover, for example, the hire of public premises being made conditional on a religious body being a prescribed body that is able to conduct same-sex marriages. That is not currently covered by the limited “no duty imposed” terminology. The amendment would help to prevent a scenario from occurring in which, for example, a religious organisation is refused hire of public buildings because it is not registered for same-sex marriages. Given that a similar amendment was accepted at Westminster, I would argue that we could learn from that example and that amendment 25 could similarly be accepted by the Scottish Parliament and the Government today. I move amendment 25.

I will comment on a few of the speeches that have been made. Marco Biagi talked about human rights law, but that is not really the concern here. The concern is that a zealous local authority that is very committed to the public sector equality duty will refuse to let a hall or whatever to a religious group that has not signed up to same-sex marriage. It is all very well to say, as the cabinet secretary did, that there is a risk that the local authority could be defeated in the courts, but the reality is that a small charity or a small church cannot possibly afford to go to the courts. Given the cost, it is just not possible for many groups to get such clarification. That is why I argue that what I propose needs to be in the bill. Jackie Baillie used a useful word that I think will come up again this afternoon when she said that the amendment is “unnecessary”, and the cabinet secretary said that there is no “need” for it. However, that is not really my argument. The argument is not that we have 100 per cent safeguards here or that we do not. We know that we are in a grey area. The question is whether we can make things a little bit clearer through amendment 25 and others. That is why I am arguing for what I propose. Patrick Harvie mentioned religious freedom. I am happy to accept that there is not complete religious freedom at the moment, but some of the danger around the bill is that, overall, religious freedom will be reduced. I end by saying that, if the Parliament accepts none of my amendments this afternoon, we will send out a signal that we have not been listening. I think that we should at least accept one or two of them. I press amendment 25.

Amendment 26 is one of the simplest and most straightforward amendments and I hope that it will gain support, even from those who are strongly in favour of the bill. Parliament knows the strength of feeling with which many in Scotland hold to the view that marriage can be only between a man and a woman. That has been the prevailing view in Scotland for centuries. It may now be considered to be a minority or even old-fashioned view, but it is an integral tenet of faith for many Christians, Muslims and others, as well as the belief of many with no faith position at all. The bill’s policy memorandum states: “Many people and organisations hold the view that marriage can only ever be between a man and a woman. The Government has made clear its respect for this view”. Similarly, during our oral evidence sessions, the director of Stonewall Scotland, Colin Macfarlane, told the Equal Opportunities Committee that not believing in same-sex marriage does not make an individual homophobic “in any way, shape or form.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 5 September 2013; c 1397.] However, a distinct lack of respect for people who express that view has already come to light—and that is before the law has changed. For example, we have seen volunteers in the third sector removed from the board for publicly supporting traditional marriage and our colleague Elaine Smith vilified for expressing her opposition to same-sex marriage.

Yes, I completely accept that intemperate language has been used. If I believe everything that is said on Facebook, thousands of people will be campaigning against me at the next election. At stage 2, some members asked why only the current definition of marriage was being singled out as worthy of respect in the amendment. The answer, of course, is that, if the law is changed, the new definition of marriage will automatically be afforded full protection and respect by the law. Amendment 26 is necessary to ensure that what may become the old definition of marriage, to which many in Scotland will continue to adhere, is likewise protected and respected. Should the new definition of marriage be agreed by Parliament, it is important that individuals and organisations that do not agree with the new definition feel free to express their opinions without fear. By agreeing to the amendment, Parliament would send a strong signal that intolerance of those who continue to believe in the current definition of marriage will not be tolerated. I understand that the language that is used in amendment 26 is a key test that is used by the European Court of Human Rights. Surely showing tolerance of and respect for those whose views may differ from the state’s position is the hallmark of any democratic society. I therefore urge MSPs across the chamber, whatever their view is on the bill, to support amendment 26. I turn to my amendment 30. It has been accepted that the need to amend the Equality Act 2010 is part of the process. I know that the Scottish Government has been working with the UK Government to prepare amendments to that act that relate to religious bodies, celebrants and others who do not wish to take part in the solemnisation of same-sex marriages. However, concerns about the Equality Act 2010 go beyond the issue of celebrants and what happens inside religious buildings. The further issue relates to ordinary people, specifically those who work in the public sector. The Equality Act 2010 is intended to protect such people against discrimination on the ground of religion or belief, but it has tended not to do so. That protected characteristic has rather been relegated below others. Therefore, I would like to see additional amendments to the 2010 act that would specify that the protected characteristic of religion or belief includes the belief in marriage as currently defined. That would not guarantee success in the courts, but it would confirm that belief is capable of being protected by the 2010 act and would make it clear that compliance with the public sector equality duty in section 149 of that act requires ensuring that no one should suffer any detriment as a result of holding or expressing the view that marriage is between a man and a woman. Nobody who works in or seeks a career in the public sector in Scotland should have their equality and diversity credentials and therefore their suitability for employment disputed merely because they hold to the existing view of marriage. That is why I believe that amendment 30 is required. I move amendment 26.

I thank members for their contributions and will mention one or two. Marco Biagi and Patrick Harvie talked about wanting balance and not wanting a hierarchy of rights. However, I am making the point that there appears to be a hierarchy of rights at the moment and we are seeking to equalise those rights, so that all protected characteristics in the Equality Act are treated more equally. That point was raised at Westminster, including by me when I was a member of the committee that studied the Equality Bill as it went through the Parliament there. The Government at that time refused to say either that all rights were equal or that there was a hierarchy. However, we have seen in practical experience that there is a hierarchy in the courts. I certainly disagree with Marco Biagi on one point. He emphasises that churches and denominations are being protected, but misses out protection for people in the voluntary and public sectors.

But the reality is that the courts decided against someone like Lillian Ladele, who was not allowed to exercise any freedom in her case. Jackie Baillie and Alex Neil said that amendment 30 is a wrecking amendment. I am willing to accept that the effects of the amendment would be more difficult to achieve than those of some of the others, but the reality is that any amendment to the Equality Act 2010 is made through negotiation with Westminster, and that is all that the amendment seeks. Murdo Fraser made a strong argument for amendment 2, which many members will have been convinced of. Kevin Stewart talked about only protecting one group, but not all groups are under the same amount of pressure. Alex Neil mentioned that the Equality Act 2010 has exactly the same problem in that it does not cover every single possible group that could be discriminated against; it focuses only on the eight or nine groups that are most discriminated against. Alex Neil said that he was “absolutely, totally sure”, although he seemed to back off from that later. That is an incredibly strong statement to make about anything that might happen in future in the courts. I want to focus on amendment 26. We all seem to agree with the wording of the amendment. If we reject it, are we saying that the belief in traditional marriage is not worthy of respect? If members wanted to send out the message that they have been listening, amendment 26 would be a good one to support.

Members will be glad to know that amendment 27 is the last of my amendments. Whatever our view of the bill, it proposes a major change to what has been the tradition in Scotland for a very long time. Even if there is—as there was at stage 1—a big majority in Parliament to pass the bill, the public is much more evenly split than we are. I suggest that amendment 27 is one of the easiest amendments to support, even for the bill’s proponents. The amendment, if agreed, would send out the message that Parliament is listening and that should anything unintended happen—on either side of the argument, because it is a neutral amendment—that can be reviewed. With that in mind, there should be a commitment to review the legislation after five years and to assess its impact. If the impact is minimal, the review will still be worth while; if, however, the legislation is shown to have had any negative effects or has not had all the positive effects that its supporters hoped for, a review will serve to address those effects. It has been said before that Parliament should regularly review all legislation, but we all know that that has not always been managed. Amendment 27 would put down a simple marker in the bill and ensure that a review takes place. It was suggested at stage 2 that amendment 27 could be interpreted as a sunset clause. The implication of that interpretation would mean that, if accepted, same-sex marriages might in the future be abolished. That is clearly not the case; all that is asked for is a review. I move amendment 27.

I agree with Jim Hume that committees should review legislation. I have been here nearly three years now, however, and I do not think that that is happening. There may be other ways of dealing with the issue, but Parliament somehow needs to get its act together on actually reviewing legislation. Patrick Harvie and Mark McDonald had an interesting interchange. Mark McDonald suggested that the proposed review suggests that there could only be negative consequences. I do not see that in amendment 27. Perhaps he wants to correct me. Christine Grahame asked about “the effects of” the introduction of same-sex marriage. In normal English, speaking as an accountant, I understand that phrase. I do not know what the legal problem with those particular words might be.

I am not sure that that intervention has clarified the issue very much in my mind—perhaps other members understand. “The effects of” means “the consequences”. Amendment 27 specifically mentions the question whether there have been “any court proceedings”, tribunals or suchlike. The cabinet secretary questioned why amendment 27 asks for a review concerning same-sex marriage only. The reality is that the rest of the bill is largely non-controversial. There were hardly any divisions at committee on the rest of the bill. By all means, we can review the whole bill, but it is this particular area that needs to be looked at. Alex Johnstone put it quite well when he spoke about an olive branch, and said that the effect would in fact be almost zero. Amendment 27 is the final amendment in my name. I find it disappointing that the cabinet secretary would not even commit to a review in a specified time, even if that is not in the eventual legislation.

The process has been a long one. I thank members, the clerks and others who have helped with a professional attitude throughout. I first said something publicly on same-sex marriage in August 2011, which was about two and a half years ago, and I realise that others have been campaigning on the issue on either side for a lot longer than that. Therefore, it will be good to reach a decision today; then we can, I hope, get on with other business and with rebuilding relationships, which might have been strained during the process. I have to say that I am disappointed that none of my amendments was accepted today. I have previously said that I am relaxed about the introduction of same-sex marriage if no one will be disadvantaged by it. However, early on in the process, it became clear that changing marriage would have significant repercussions throughout society. We need to be realistic and accept that this is a significant change in how our society operates. Although some see it as a major step forward on human rights, others feel that a key part of their lives and experience and a key building block of society is being undermined. As we have seen in other countries, same-sex marriage will continue to be an area of controversy even after it is introduced. Ideally, we all want a society in which everyone is treated equally and minority views are at least tolerated, if not welcomed. However, the fear among some people is that we might see a switch from lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people being discriminated against to religious or other people with a traditional view being discriminated against. Will Christians and others be squeezed out of working in the public sector? We are not sure.

We have gone over some of this already, but it appears that, for example, somebody with traditional committed Christian or Muslim beliefs cannot be a registrar in the public sector. I do not think that that is the Government’s intention, and I accept that some safeguards have been built in. I also accept that we can never have 100 per cent safeguards or know where the courts will go in future. I am therefore disappointed at the Parliament’s response to the amendments on that issue that were proposed today. There are parts of the bill that are not controversial. The controversial part is clearly same-sex marriage. However, the bill comes against a backdrop of questions about the place of religion in society, which will be an issue in the future whether or not Scotland gains independence. There is a clear trend away from religion these days. Society seems to be becoming increasingly secular and humanist. However, it is also interesting to look a little below the surface and see how people react at times of stress and loss. We did not take evidence from the Scottish Independent Celebrants Association, but it has spoken to MSPs in Parliament. Independent celebrants report how many people approach them for a funeral not wanting a full church or religious service but still wanting a hymn and a prayer, which the humanists cannot provide. It was also interesting how many people speaking about the recent helicopter crash who would not normally be seen as religious talked about our thoughts and prayers being with the families of victims and attended church services and mass. We are in an untidy kind of society that is perhaps not as Christian as I would like or as humanist as Patrick Harvie would like, but we need to recognise where people are at. For many, that includes a bit of faith and religion, at least below the surface. The relationship between church and state is part of the debate as well. I am clear that church and state should be separate and that the church should not be in a privileged position, as it has been in the past—neither the church nor the state benefited from that. The bill is not perfect and could have been improved more along the way. However, the key point for me and others is that we may well be, and probably are, opening the door for more discrimination against religious and other people who think a bit differently from the rest of society. I hope that I am proved wrong in that, but the signs are not encouraging. For that reason, I feel forced to vote against the bill.

Does the First Minister agree that the statutory minimum wage should be at a higher level that people could actually live on, and that Labour and Conservative Governments at Westminster have failed to achieve that? [Interruption.]

Can the minister expand a little on how we will combine keeping the games as secure as possible while keeping them as friendly as possible? We do not want people to be facing the police or the military or whatever at every corner.

I agree with the member about payday lenders. However, does she agree that it is quite difficult to say what is a good company and what is a bad company? Atos has been mentioned before. Although it does some things that we disagree with, bits of what it does are probably quite good. The same could probably be said about most of the sponsors.

We can all be enthusiastic about the Commonwealth games coming to Scotland, but I hope that I can be allowed to be a little bit extra enthusiastic, because a number of the venues are in the east end of Glasgow. A lot of the east end has been completely transformed, to the extent that people who have not been there recently would hardly recognise it all. That is especially true of the new road that was built, which runs from the north to the south, from Parkhead Forge down towards Polmadie and the motorway. The road was originally called the east end regeneration route; it is now called Clyde Gateway after the urban regeneration company that has been involved in regenerating the area. In the Glasgow Shettleston constituency specifically, we have Celtic Park, where the opening ceremony will be, the games village, the Emirates arena, the Tollcross pool and Glasgow green hockey. I remind the member for Glasgow Cathcart, Mr Dornan, that my stadium is bigger than his. It is especially good that Scottish Hockey is now based at the new facility on Glasgow green. I think that there were some doubts about that earlier on, but it is good that progress has been made. The staff whom I met there are extremely enthusiastic. One of the hopes has to be that hockey can be rolled out to youngsters from a wider range of backgrounds. During my lifetime, rugby has changed from being a largely regional sport in the Borders and the preserve of private schools to a sport that has huge appeal right across the board. I hope that that can happen to hockey, too. The superb new facilities should certainly facilitate that, but we have to accept that that will not happen overnight and that it will take some time. I was encouraged to hear from Scottish Hockey that some of its young players who are coming through are being allocated tickets so that they can go and watch the hockey specifically. That has to be an encouragement to them. We still face challenges across the east end of Glasgow, of course. For example, there is vacant and derelict land there that we still want to be used. However, the 32 per cent reduction in such land over the past few years is hugely encouraging. I was struck by the figures that showed what people thought when they were asked whether they thought that their area had got better in the past three years. Nationally, 14 per cent thought that their area had got better; in the east end of Glasgow, the figure was 44 per cent. A piece of good news for me was that, earlier this month, I was accepted as a volunteer. I understand that I can now consider myself a Clyde-sider, which is the official term. That fits well with my football allegiances. Whether that is good news for the spectators whom I might direct around Glasgow remains to be seen, of course. The interview and selection process was very impressive. I do not think that I have ever been interviewed for a job or other role by somebody so much younger than me. That could be a sign that I am getting older. The questions included one on whether I could work as part of a team. I was tempted to say that perhaps they should speak to our whips—but then I thought that perhaps I should not suggest that. However, I got through, and I am looking forward to the first training session, which is on 8 March. One of the most encouraging pieces of news in the run-up to July has been how well the tickets have sold. At the beginning, some of us wondered whether there would be an appetite for some of the minority sports, so I am both surprised and delighted at the level of sales. Of course, that has also brought expressions of disappointment from those who did not get the tickets that they had hoped for, but the process seems to have been handled much more fairly than the process for the London Olympics. I just hope that youngsters who are interested in particular sports will be able to get tickets for them. With any such event, some disruption is inevitable. Local roads will be closed and venues will be unavailable to the public for a spell, but we just have to accept that and look at the longer term. People in my constituency will in particular face disruption, but the longer-term gains are world-class facilities that are available to the public and more world-class events coming to Scotland. When I mentioned local benefits, I concentrated on sports events and the new transport infrastructure, but I would also like to mention what I see as one of the best aspects of the games’ legacy for local people: the games village, which will become housing. As the minister mentioned, there will be about 700 houses, several hundred of which will be for social rent, plus a care home for 120 people. The homes are of an exceptionally high standard that is beyond what is normally available on the open market. Unsurprisingly, constituents have asked me whether they can get a house in the area, and that is probably without many people realising just how high the standard is. The district heating system and high insulation standards should mean that heating costs are much lower than normal. Clearly, supply will not meet demand, although that is perhaps a good problem to have. One knock-on challenge of the new housing is whether the local primary schools will be able to cope with the number of young children who come to live in the area. I hope that Glasgow City Council is considering that. If the council ends up having to build a new school, that is obviously a good problem to have. While I am on the subject of accommodation, I should perhaps mention More than Gold 2014, an organisation that has been put together by the churches and which seeks to make accommodation available for athletes’ families, especially those who come from less well-off countries and who might struggle to get hotel accommodation in the Glasgow area. They can perhaps be put up by people opening up their homes, which is to be welcomed. As we look forward with less than six months to the games, we know that there is a lot of hard work to be done, but we can be positive about it and about what has been achieved so far.

I welcome the opportunity to take part in the debate. There are a number of measures that we can all be positive about, especially the emphasis on childcare and free school meals, which ties in with briefings that we have received from Save the Children and Children in Scotland. Malcolm Chisholm slightly overstates the influence of the Labour Party in all that. Usually he is quite balanced, but he went a bit off balance in his speech. If we were asked which member has been going on more than most about childcare, we would probably say Willie Rennie. The third sector and a number of my colleagues have been pushing on the issue, and I think that we would say that the Labour Party has been a poor third when it comes to campaigning. I was particularly struck by one of the questions that Save the Children asked in its briefing for the debate: “How has Scottish Government ensured that funding is adequate to achieve its policy aims”? In many ways, that is a key question—in fact, in many ways, it is the key question—because the answer to it is that the funds that are available to the Scottish Government are not adequate to do all that we want to do, so the budget is very much about choosing how to use limited resources to have the maximum positive effect. It is worth re-emphasising why we need wider powers, especially over taxation. At present, if we spend more on childcare or boost the economy in any other way, the pay-as-you-earn, the national insurance, the extra VAT and the extra corporation tax all go to Westminster. It is not that we are mean or begrudge Westminster a few extra pounds here or there, but we need to get that tax money back to continue to finance the policy. That point seems to have been missed by some of the speakers in previous debates on the subject. We can afford to pay for more childcare only if the resulting tax is recycled into the system. Otherwise, it is like paddling a leaky boat so that, however much effort we put into paddling hard and well, our efforts are counteracted by the water leaking in or, in the case of the economy, the money leaking out. Another example of what we have to do with our limited resources is the bedroom tax, which has already been mentioned. I very much welcome the £20 million to mitigate those welfare cuts, but that is £20 million that could have been used to improve other things. In fact, Mr Swinney mentioned £244 million as the total amount that is going on countering some of the welfare cuts. Iain Gray said that those cuts, specifically the bedroom tax, are iniquitous. Most of us agree that the bedroom tax is iniquitous but, sadly, it is not the only iniquitous thing that is happening. In some ways, the sanctions on peoples’ benefits are more iniquitous. I have constituents turning up at surgeries whose bedroom tax arrears may be piling up in the background but whose issue when I meet them is that, for no apparent reason or because they were meant to be in two places at one time, their benefits have been sanctioned and they have no money for heating, food or their phone. I do not know whether Mr Gray is suggesting that we could compensate for all the sanctions as well as the bedroom tax, but it is clear that choices have to be made. The money that we have to put into compensating for Westminster cuts could be put into health, housing or colleges rather than just cancelling out the attack on some of our poorest folk. In fact, it could be said that our efforts to improve things in Scotland are being put on pause while Westminster messes us around. Do we want Scotland to be put on pause every time there is a Tory Government at Westminster? I presume that the Labour members accept that, for roughly 50 per cent of the time in the future, there will be a Tory Government at Westminster. Therefore, for 50 per cent of the time, Scotland will be on hold while we try to deal with that. Whoever is in power at Holyrood cannot implement progressive policies during those periods. Do we want a system that allows Labour and the SNP Government to tackle poverty? Of course we do—and although we will not have enough funds to do everything that we want to do straight away, we could have a situation in which we are much more the masters of our own destiny. The national performance framework has been mentioned. We spent a lot of time considering it at the Finance Committee, and it featured in the committee debate before Christmas. However, it is worth referring to it again, not least because it is still not as well known as it could be and one way that we can make it better known is by talking about it in the chamber, especially in supporting the scrutiny of the budget. A key strength of the national performance framework is that it goes beyond gross domestic product. I suspect that GDP will continue to be a central measure in this country and beyond for some considerable time, but I think that most of us agree that it is not enough just to measure GDP. Of course, the national performance framework can always be improved on, not least because what the public is looking for and the specific challenges that we face this year and next year will change over time. Therefore, the detail will need to change. However, I come back to the fact that some extremely positive comments were made about the framework at committee. Frankly, I think that some of us were surprised at how positive some of the witnesses were about Scotland’s position on the NPF and Scotland performs. That should encourage us to talk about the framework more, use it more and build on it. As mentioned earlier, the key point for the Finance Committee is that we could not always see the link between the NPF and some of the spending in the budget, but I do not think that we were questioning the fact that a link exists. We once again face a budget that has been severely curtailed by the failure of the United Kingdom over many years. I support the budget as proposed but I hope that, in the future, the Parliament will be able to make a much wider range of decisions that could make things much better for all the people of Scotland.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with independent theological colleges regarding tuition fees for students from Scotland. (S4O-02754)

Students are puzzled that Scottish students have to pay fees but cannot get loans, whereas English students pay fees and can get loans to cover them. Would the cabinet secretary be willing to meet me and representatives of the colleges to see whether we can find a way forward?

Does the member agree that, if we could push up the statutory minimum wage, that would be even better than the living wage? I think that Alison Johnstone made that point, as well.

Will the member give way?

I was just wondering whether it is not true that Mr Osborne also got it wrong, because he has had to borrow considerably more money than he planned to borrow.

We can start on a positive note. There are encouraging signs in the economy. The recent Bank of Scotland economic update highlighted that GDP had risen for four consecutive quarters and that employment had risen 11,000 in the quarter ending October 2013, with data suggesting that recovery continued into November 2013. It showed that Scotland is in a relatively strong position internationally, with GDP per head eighth highest out of 34 in the OECD. In comparison with the UK, Scotland has been stronger for the past 30 years. The reality is that we have been and are subsidising the rest of the UK. Other areas are not so positive. I start with population. One of the failures of the UK has been the uneven population growth between England and Scotland since 1707. Not surprisingly, that lopsided population growth is reflected in a lopsided growth of our respective economies. It is a lot easier to achieve better public services and growth in businesses if our population is growing. Scotland has lost a lot of its population over the centuries, for example through emigration and unjustified war. As a result, we can be considered an underpopulated country. In fact, it is only recently that the population has stabilised. Of course, immigration needs to be managed, but if we are serious about growing business, the tax base and public services, we really need more people. When I was younger, Scotland had well over 0.1 per cent of the world’s population; we are now well under 0.1 per cent. We cannot afford to keep slipping at that rate. Another aspect has been the tightening of student visas, with the loss of the post-study work visa. I very much welcome the fact that that could be reintroduced if we controlled immigration. Among other things, the motion recognises that “Scotland’s long-term potential will continue to be hampered by the large gap between rich and poor”. That was explained very well by Alison Johnstone. It is noticeable that, in the amendments, only the Greens left that bit in their proposed amended motion. The other three parties propose to take that bit out of the motion and, as far as I can see, not replace it with anything similar. It is true not only for Scotland but for the UK, the EU and the world as a whole that the gap between rich and poor damages the economy. As Murdo Fraser has accepted, the UK economy is one of the most unequal in the developed world as far as income is concerned. We rank 28th out of 34 OECD countries, which I reckon makes us seventh worst. Some feel that closing the gap between rich and poor is a luxury that we cannot afford at the moment.

While I accept that I, too, am using comparative figures, I have a problem with that, which is what I see on the ground. I can go into a restaurant in Glasgow that is packed out with people who have money and are spending a lot of money on nice meals, but I can also go out of my constituency office and see people who are really struggling to live. That is the reality; that is the gap that I am seeing. Although we can make comparisons, there is a gap that I find unacceptable. Some people may feel that closing that gap is just on the wish list and that we may get round to it eventually if the economy grows a bit more, but I do not believe that that is the case.

What I do know is that, first, when I was in the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities all the parties wanted to stop ring fencing; and, secondly, all that we can really do in this Parliament, with the budget that we have, is move money around. If there is £1 billion less in one place, it will be in the health service or somewhere else—that money has not vanished. If Labour wants to take £1 billion out of the health service, it is up to Labour to put that option forward. By contrast, as we see in other countries where a few people have all the money in the economy, rich people spend that money differently from the way it is spent if the money is spread around more evenly. If money is spread more evenly, it will boost all of the economy. The risk that Labour says in its amendment that it wants to share with the rest of the UK is, presumably, the risk that we will have a Tory Government 50 per cent of the time. I find that unacceptable.

Will the member give way?

In closing the debate on behalf of the Finance Committee, I would like to touch on a few issues that have been mentioned during the debate and make some other comments, as time allows. I echo the thanks of the convener to the various people who have contributed to the budget process, because even practical issues such as arranging our trip to Arbroath involve a lot of work. I also thank all members for their useful contributions, some of which we would agree with more than others. If I have time, I will touch on some of the extremely useful workshops that we held in Arbroath, where we listened to local people. The convener spoke about the national performance framework and the Scotland performs website. I will not spend a lot of time on that, as it has been mentioned quite a lot by other members. It is worth highlighting a statement that we heard in evidence from Professor Jeremy Peat of the David Hume Institute, who said: “I think that Scotland should be proud of the NPF. It is a remarkable achievement to have got something so detailed, so regularly presented and so transparent in terms of the data, targets and information that are set out. It is a hugely positive base from which to proceed.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 2 October 2013; c 3087.] That illustrates the point, which came through at committee, that no one is saying that the NPF is the final article and cannot be built upon. It is something that we all want to build on. While such positivity about the NPF was welcomed by the committee, we should accept that it is not well known among the public. More could perhaps be done to promote its use, especially in supporting scrutiny of the budget. Members made quite a range of comments about the national performance framework, including Mr Swinney. Kenny Gibson referred to it in his opening remarks. Members also referred to the positive feedback from the Carnegie Trust and the Royal Society of Edinburgh. The point has been made that Scotland performs is a measure not just of Government but of the whole country. That takes us into an area of complexity about who we are measuring and how we are measuring it. That is an issue not just of fact but of putting across to the public, and even to academics, who is responsible for what. In a useful contribution, Iain Gray, I think, asked whether the cabinet secretary would accept that it was always his responsibility if something went wrong. Clearly, we would all agree that that is not the case, but it can sometimes be difficult to differentiate between what the Government has done and what it is responsible for in the outcomes and the other factors that are involved. A number of members touched on outcomes and outputs. The NHS in particular has been mentioned, with, on the one hand, the satisfaction of much of the public with the NHS and, on the other, measures of output such as the number of nurses. On preventative spending, it was clear in committee that if we were successful in keeping people out of hospital—which many of us would like to do—that would mean fewer hospitals and fewer nurses. However, few politically would dare to stand up and say that they welcome fewer hospitals and fewer nurses. Gavin Brown talked about wanting a stronger link between spend and outcomes. Mr Swinney asked him how a stronger link could be achieved. I did not think that I would say this but I was struck by what Mr Hepburn said, which was that we all have a responsibility to ask questions and use the NPF in debates in the chamber and in committee. He hit the nail on the head there, because it is perfectly feasible for all of us, when we are questioning Government ministers—or anyone for that matter—to ask them how what they are doing ties into the NPF and the indicators. I am as guilty as anyone of not doing that. There is a lot of potential for all of us to get involved in that and to move forward.

Yes, I think that we would all agree with that. One question is how much of the NPF should be in statute and how much of it should be allowed just to carry on without a statutory basis; indeed, another question is whether the indicators themselves should change over time. After all, whichever Government or party is in power, society changes and priorities change. I do not think that we reached a final conclusion on that matter; some suggested a limit on the number of indicators, while others wanted them to be expanded. Last month, the committee met in Arbroath. We were joined by the cabinet secretary in the afternoon but, in the morning, we spent some useful time listening to the views of local people and organisations. I sat on a small group that comprised a diverse range of participants, including representatives from Angus Council, local small businesses, the Prince’s Trust and Enable. It soon became clear that there was a range of familiarity with NPF, with some participants being very familiar with it while others, frankly, had little knowledge of it at all. That was very much in keeping with previous evidence heard by the committee that, although many of those familiar with it felt that it contained a lot of useful content, there was a lack of broad familiarity with it across the country as a whole. However, despite the differing levels of familiarity, when the group started to discuss some of the issues addressed in the NPF, it became clear that many of them were tangible and of everyday relevance to people. Coming from Glasgow, with a tendency to be slightly city-centric, I found it helpful to hear different perspectives from smaller towns such as Arbroath and its neighbours in Angus. We heard, for example, that many local businesses had particular issues with competition from the bigger cities. As has been previously noted—indeed, it has been extensively mentioned this afternoon—preventative spending has been a key area of interest. Both the current Finance Committee and its predecessor have spent a lot of time on the matter. Clearly national and local government must utilise their finite resources as efficiently and effectively as possible; however, the committee recognises the challenges faced by public bodies. These were summed up by Glasgow City Council, which said: “the expectation is that we will treat the population and their needs as they stand right now, yet prevention and early intervention dividends will be felt much further down the track, five or even 10 years away. The reconciliation that health boards and local authorities are left to deal with comes from the fact that the pressing needs and the expected gains do not coincide.” That issue has been touched on a few times this afternoon. For example, the benefit of the extra money that education might spend on prevention now will be felt in health, prisons and so on. Although progress towards integrating the provision of public services has been made in some areas—most notably, perhaps, in the Highlands—Fife Council highlighted to us some of the challenges that it faced, saying: “The success of prevention and early intervention will depend on the reshaping of mainstream provision and universal services. It is not about a small, targeted response; it is about reshaping the whole system approach.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 9 October; c 3144 and 3167.] Turning to comments that were made in the debate, I note that Malcolm Chisholm mentioned the issue of disinvestment. I think that that takes us back to Glasgow City Council’s comments; the difficulty is that this is a moving playing field. For example, demand for hospitals and elderly care might be increasing. Disinvestment might not necessarily mean closing a hospital; it might mean not opening an extra hospital because more people can be treated at home. We simply have to accept that these issues are tricky. A number of members talked about priorities and where money should be spent. As Bob Doris mentioned, most of the suggestions have been about what to do with the consequential funds; there have not been many suggestions about changing the budget as a whole. We may get to that at stage 1, but at the moment it certainly seems that most of the debate is about what to do with those funds. Mark McDonald commented that Labour was asking for a lot of things—everything, in fact—and Anne McTaggart, who spoke immediately afterwards, asked for more money for local government. In conclusion, I note that the next draft budget that we will be scrutinising will make use of the powers under the Scotland Act 2012, and will include the land and buildings transaction tax and the landfill tax. For the time being, however, I very much look forward to the Finance Committee’s on-going work in that regard, and I support the motion in the convener’s name.

It is always good to welcome a new tax, although I take the point that the landfill tax is, in fact, a replacement tax and that it is probable that many people will see little immediate change. I accept that it is a relatively small tax and that we hope that it will become smaller over time. Even with it, only about 15 per cent of taxes that are paid in Scotland will come under this Parliament’s control. However, it is still an important tax, not least because it brings together environment policy and revenue raising. It is much to be welcomed that the tax and the fines to be paid by those who carry out unauthorised disposals are to be introduced. Obviously, as with all taxes in Scotland, we need to be aware of what our neighbours and competitors are doing. We might want to have a higher landfill tax for the good of the environment, for example, but there is little point in having that if it only shifts waste across the border and we suffer a loss of revenue. Therefore, the statement that Scottish rates will mirror UK rates and that the Scottish rate will be no lower than the UK rate in 2015 is pretty fair in the circumstances. The rate of tax is still to be decided, of course—that has already been mentioned—but a number of red herrings are swimming around in that regard. Going forward, there is no certainty about UK tax rates, so neither businesses nor individuals can have any more faith in a UK Administration than in a Scottish one. In fact, it could be argued that John Swinney is much more boring—I am sorry; I meant to say more stable—than George Osborne, so we can expect more sensible tax decisions in Scotland than we might get in the UK. We still have to wait and see whether there will be sensible decisions on the block grant adjustment. The odd thing about the landfill tax is that, if it is successful, the tax take will fall, and that must be taken into account when the block grant adjustment is made. All three block grant adjustments for the three taxes that we are taking over are the subject of negotiation between the Scottish and UK Governments. The Revenue Scotland and Tax Powers Bill, which has been mentioned, was introduced on Friday, and I am certainly looking forward to considering it in detail in the Finance Committee. Tax avoidance is a topical issue, so we have the opportunity to put down some markers on that. Trying to achieve fairness can lead to complex legislation and that, in turn, can mean loopholes for those who can afford expensive tax advice, so we need to emphasise simplicity and tax legislation that is clear to all, including the courts. It is also encouraging that revenue Scotland is expected to cost around 25 per cent less than the cost of the same work being done by Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs. In conclusion, the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill is the second of the proposed tax bills stemming from the Scotland Act 2012. I very much welcome the fact that such control is coming to Scotland. We have to accept that we have limited room for manoeuvre on landfill tax, but we need to tackle the huge problem of waste that we face, and the bill gives the opportunity to do so.

I wonder whether the member will accept my main point, which was that we can put more faith in John Swinney than we can in George Osborne.

4. To ask the First Minister what the implications are of the autumn statement for Scotland’s budget. (S4F-01767)

The First Minister will be aware of the hammer blow from the Conservative-Lib Dem statement that the retirement age is to rise yet again, meaning that Scottish youngsters who are leaving school this year will have to work for more than 50 years—

—to get the state pension. It takes no account of Scotland’s lower life expectancy. What will Scotland’s pension policy be following a yes vote?

Is the cabinet secretary confident that the business rates scheme will continue to ensure that we have the most competitive rates regime in the UK?

We certainly see a lot of optimism in the Conservatives’ motion, but there is very little evidence or hard facts to back up that optimism. We will see what happens in due course. I have been on the Finance Committee for some time with both Kenny Gibson and Gavin Brown. We have looked at various OBR projections, so we need to take some of its optimism with a pinch of salt. The motion suggests that the UK economy is growing faster now and that it will do so in the future, but that means little when it started off in a worse position and—as we have heard—it is not growing as fast as other countries’ economies. The UK economy was damaged more than those of other countries and, unlike in the UK, gross domestic product is back at pre-recession levels in Canada, Japan, the United States, Germany and elsewhere. As well as looking forward to what might happen, let us remember to look at the facts of what has happened. Population is a key factor in the economy. When we joined England in the union in 1707, its population was about four times the population of Scotland. Now England’s population is about ten times ours. Surely that has been hugely damaging to our economy. Over the years, people have left Scotland because they saw little future here under the UK, and our economy has suffered as a result. Since devolution, that problem has been taken much more seriously by all Administrations and there are signs of improvement, but we still have a problem when we have engineering vacancies that cannot be filled and low business start-up and growth rates. That could be addressed—partly, at least—by allowing talented young overseas graduates who have studied in Scotland to stay on for a few years and contribute to the economy. The motion mentions national insurance. A break for employers for the young people whom they take on is certainly to be welcomed, but we are still left with a UK tax system that is highly complex. What do the UK parties intend to do to simplify the system? For example, would they consider combining national insurance and income tax? On corporation tax, of course taxation of company profits is basically a good thing, but we are in a competitive situation internationally. We want to attract investment and jobs here, and it is clear that cutting the rate of corporation tax can increase the tax take overall. The risk that Linda Fabiani highlighted relates not to the rate that companies are paying, but to the fact that some companies are not paying any corporation tax at all, or are paying it in the wrong places. As she said, the fact that some companies are paying hardly any corporation tax is not to do with the rate; it is because the regime that is in place is slack. If we tax salaries and dividends that come out of companies, and if there is transparency internationally on transfer pricing, where the profits are made and where the tax is paid, we should see movement on that front. That might be as important as the rate.

I am not here to speak for anyone else. If Mr Macintosh wants someone else’s opinion, he can ask them. I am here to give my opinion. The public health supplement targets sales of alcohol and tobacco. We cannot tax those products specifically, even if we might like to have the powers to do so, but we know that they cause harm and result in extra costs for the national health service. Therefore, the imposition of such a targeted rates charge is surely the best thing to do. That is an example of using the powers that we have, even if they are not ideal.

As I understand it, the NHS is the one sector that has had its funding protected. I am not entirely convinced by the argument for ring fencing. The whole point of raising tax is redistribution and helping those at the bottom. Too much ring fencing brings dangers. The Conservative motion uses the phrase “help the Scottish economy”. To me, it suggests that any increase in economic activity is good, but surely we must accept that there is good economic activity and bad economic activity. If we all drank twice as much whisky, that might help the economy, but it would damage our health and it would cost the NHS. Instead of taking the Conservatives’ simplistic view, we need to think through potential economic activity and its likely impact.

I am sorry, but I am pushed for time. If we are to have minimum pricing for alcohol, larger shops might make higher profits. Surely they should pay tax on those. We have debated business rates and empty property relief previously, and I am not sure that we need to debate them again. However, we have had examples—in smaller towns and in cities such as Glasgow—of cases in which it appears that developers have deliberately sat on property in the hope that its capital value will increase. The result was a shortage of property to let in some locations. I have previously used the example of the old post office in George Square in Glasgow, which sat empty for years and was a serious blight on a key part of the city centre. Are the Conservatives seriously suggesting that such owners should not pay rates? The motion is about finance. I accept that that is a broad topic and that the focus has been on the economy and its recovery, but there seems to have been a glaring omission. Who will benefit from any economic recovery? We know that the UK is one of the most unequal societies in the developed world. Are the Conservatives satisfied with that? If the Liberal Democrats are satisfied with that, that is even more disappointing. Even if the Conservatives’ argument is that the poor must suffer most until they get the economy going again—I do not agree with that—at what stage do they think we should start sharing out the benefits more equally? At what stage should the statutory minimum wage be raised to a living wage? However big or small the cake is, it needs to be divided up. Have the Conservatives nothing to say about creating a more equal society, or is it all just about getting a bigger cake and deil tak the hindmost?

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that one of the underlying principles in the white paper is that we would have more money if we were not subsidising nuclear weapons and that, if we had more money, one of the priorities would be housing?

Will the member give way?

If the member had to choose between more houses in Aberdeen and getting rid of the Aberdeen western peripheral route, which would he choose?

I welcome the developments that are taking place in my constituency, where Parkhead Housing Association, Shettleston Housing Association and Glasgow Housing Association have all been building homes, and there is specialist provision from Loretto Housing Association among others. I reiterate and underline my welcome for the Commonwealth games village, which is nearing completion and which, after the games, will provide 700 homes—400 for social rent and 300 for sale—as well as a 120-bed care home to serve the east end. We now understand that, because there has been so much interest in those homes in the east end, developers are now showing interest in the wider area. That is very encouraging and is one of the things that we wanted to see from the Commonwealth games giving a boost to the area. We all want more to be done. There are a number of factors as to why more houses have not been built and cannot be built at the moment. The first is the general economy. Somebody mismanaged the UK economy. I do not agree with the way in which the Conservative Government is trying to fix it, but it was under the previous Labour Administration when things went badly wrong. Let us remember in passing that, when the economy went badly wrong in Ireland, one of the problems was that too many houses were built—houses that no one could afford and, in some cases, houses that are now being demolished. Let us not be too simplistic as we consider the numbers. Secondly, housing associations are finding it harder to borrow. That in itself has a number of reasons. One is that the banks themselves are more wary of lending, because of some of the bad lending that they have done before. That is despite the fact that housing associations are traditionally very safe borrowers. Another reason for the reduction in lending could be the bedroom tax and the concern that tenants will be unable to pay their rent. That, in turn, makes the banks and other lenders less certain about housing association income flows. Just yesterday evening, I attended a housing association committee, and its members reckon that one eighth of their tenants are affected by the bedroom tax. Some of them—most of them, in fact—are getting help through discretionary housing payment, but that is only intended to be short-term assistance. There is evidence that some tenants are refusing to apply for discretionary housing payments, because they consider the bedroom tax so morally wrong. A third factor why more houses cannot be built is that the Scottish Government’s budget has been cut. We have to be realistic about the money. I have to live within my means, as do all members here. So do housing associations, so do councils, and so does the Government. All of us have to live within our means. We would all like to spend more money on many things, and housing would certainly be a top priority for me, as it continues to be the main issue that constituents raise with me. However, if more is to be spent on housing, less is available to be spent elsewhere.

It has started and is going on: as I said, there are 700 new homes being built right now—more than that, in fact—in my constituency. I am trying to argue that we are constrained by the amount of money that we have. That is the reality: we all have to live within our means and, if more is to be spent on housing, less will be spent on something else. What exactly does the Opposition mean by the phrase in its motion, “a comprehensive, ambitious and inclusive national housing action plan”? At the beginning of her speech, Jackie Baillie said that she would tell us what we can do. I was listening, and I was waiting to hear what that would be. All that she did for six minutes, however, was to describe the problem. She is rushing back to her seat to intervene.

I suspect that the housing minister will be very sympathetic to any suggestions about how we can do things better, but the key problem as far as I am concerned—I think that I am the first member of the Finance Committee to have spoken in the debate—is a lack of money. I intervened earlier during Mary Fee’s speech. She suggested that one way of having more money for housing would have been if GARL had not been cancelled. That is a very interesting idea. Is she saying that GARL should not have been started by Strathclyde partnership for transport—controlled by Labour—in the first place? Was it a Labour mistake to cancel it? Is she saying that it should have been completed? In that case, there would have been less money available for housing, because that money would have gone into GARL. What a bizarre suggestion. Is Labour suggesting that we drop the Southern general hospital and put more money into housing? Is it suggesting that we drop Glasgow to Edinburgh rail electrification and put more money into housing from that? Those would all be options, albeit not my options. It would at least help if Labour would tell us where the money was to come from. Alternatively, does Labour want the existing housing budget to fund the building of more homes? How is that to be done? Would Labour reduce housing association grant levels at a time when the Government has only recently increased them again? Would Labour cut them again? I agree with Maureen Watt’s comments that it is disappointing to see a personal attack on the minister. It should be possible to debate such issues and to disagree on how we are dealing with them, and even to attack Government policy, but we should not necessarily be attacking the person. I am very sympathetic towards the Green amendment. Many of the antisocial behaviour problems in my constituency relate to the private rented sector.

There are many housing issues on which work is needed. For me, housing is one of the top priorities. Let us have fewer personal attacks on the minister and more practical suggestions about what can be done.

Will the member give way?

There is not that much difference between the Government motion and the Opposition amendment when it comes to the fact that there is a problem, there is a need to tackle it and there is no easy solution. Just yesterday, I visited the new Royal Mail delivery office in my constituency, as other members have been doing. I was somewhat taken aback by just how male-dominated the delivery office is and how few women are in that workforce, although I was assured that the two women who work there are more than holding their own. As has been mentioned already, the Equal Opportunities Committee produced a report on this topic. It had a strong emphasis on childcare as referred to in the motion, because many witnesses talked about childcare. In fact, Opposition members have emphasised childcare in this chamber and in committees for quite a long time. However, now that the white paper contains the major commitment on childcare, the Opposition’s emphasis seems to have shifted somewhat. The Government motion talks about “tackling all of the barriers” and the amendment talks about barriers, including but “not exclusive to” childcare, so there is no big difference there. The Equal Opportunities Committee report that was published in June focuses on the three key areas of occupational segregation, flexible working and childcare. Occupational segregation is therefore clearly recognised to be an issue and it has been referred to this afternoon. The tendency is also reflected when it comes to the modern apprenticeship programme, which has largely followed the traditional splits. The report concludes at paragraph 181: “schools are clearly an influence at a crucial stage ... although the problem in its entirety could never be resolved solely by schools”. I was impressed in committee by examples of representatives from the oil and gas sector, to which Dennis Robertson has referred, and especially by women representatives who are going into schools in the north-east of Scotland. However, there appears to be a wider problem with engineering jobs being available but not enough people coming through to take them. Some of the young people who I speak to in Glasgow seem to have had little encouragement from their schools to go in the direction of the jobs. That certainly includes women. When there has been some success in changing attitudes, it is very encouraging, and we should be positive about it. The committee heard about lawyers and the police having many more women recruits than there used to be, but the problem with those sectors is that not so many women are in the promoted positions. There is a variety of reasons for that and I hope that, over time, women will work their way through, but it will not be automatic and a positive effort will be needed. The big disagreement between the motion and the amendment is in relation to the constitution. The final line of the Labour amendment seeks to separate “the real, lived experience of women” from the constitution. Is that a fair split? Are the two completely separate? Subjects such as the minimum wage and childcare are not, in themselves, constitutional questions—although both could be included in a written constitution—but they could be improved by a better constitutional settlement. Women at work are inextricably linked with the constitution, and anyone who says that they are totally separate is not living in the real world. The other major problem I have with the amendment comes through the words: “believes in a United Kingdom ... creating a more social, just, fair and decent society”. Is that just an assertion or is there any evidence for it? I see a United Kingdom that is one of the most unequal nations in the developed world. I see a United Kingdom in which women are getting a very raw deal. It seems to me that the United Kingdom has failed, and there is very little evidence that things will improve.

Even if a Labour Government could improve things in one term, it would be turned back by the next Tory Government.

Will Jenny Marra take an intervention?

Will Jenny Marra give way?

The point that I hoped to make and will make is that Labour can do lots of good things at Westminster—as I said in my speech—but they can be undone by the Tories. The advantage of independence would be that good things here could not be undone by them.

Can the member confirm whether under her Government at Westminster the UK will definitely be in Europe in 10 years’ time?

Does the cabinet secretary agree with the Queen’s counsel who told the Equal Opportunities Committee that legally the guidance will have no binding effect?

I am very grateful to have the opportunity to take part in this debate today. Clearly, we are dealing with a sensitive subject, and there has been a certain amount of strident language in the media from people at both ends of the spectrum. However, it was encouraging that in committee there was a generally reasonable tone from both committee members and witnesses. That tone was important because, whether Scotland is devolved or independent, we must be able to disagree among ourselves in a civilised way. I believe that that is what this Parliament is for. We do not all need to be the same as each other and we do not all need to agree on one point of view. I want what I hope we all want, which is a pluralistic and inclusive Scotland that is made up of a wide variety of people and groups, and in which people of different backgrounds and orientations, and people with traditional faiths or none, can all belong and feel at home. I think that we have to note as well that Parliament is not reflecting public opinion on this issue. We can argue about whether those supporting or those opposing the bill have the greater numbers on their side, but there is certainly not the overwhelming support outside this place for the bill that there seems to be inside. Parliament therefore needs to tread wisely if it is to keep all the people of Scotland on board.

There are people puzzled because we have not got over it already, and there are people puzzled about why we are looking at it when they think that there are other things that are more important. We need to deal with this subject sensitively—I think that Ruth Davidson gave us a tremendous example of that—as we are talking about personal relationships. We have people who have a relationship with a partner whom they love and who want the right to marry them; we have people in a loving marriage relationship who feel that the proposed changes could devalue that relationship; and we have people like me who have a relationship with Jesus and want to show our love for him. Let us all accept that and try at least to tolerate a range of views. There are two main arguments against the bill: one is on the principle that marriage is between a man and a woman and the second is about whether adequate safeguards are in place for those who disagree. The latter is a concern that comes on top of the feeling of some religious people that they are being increasingly marginalised in society. On the first, the argument is that the word “marriage” has had a recognised meaning for a very long time. Some would argue that Parliament cannot or should not change that meaning. By widening the meaning, it dilutes the value.

No. I am sorry but I have to get on. From a personal perspective, I have a lot of sympathy for that argument. However, that raises the question of how much my faith as a personal position should decide how I vote on an issue such as this. Coming from a Baptist perspective, I believe strongly in the separation of church and state. While state has responsibility for restricting some actions and behaviour, it cannot ultimately impose values on people. For me, therefore, the crucial arguments are around the protections for those who disagree with same-sex marriage, whether they are denominations, celebrants, or public sector or other workers. We have assurances from the Scottish and Westminster Governments that all is safe and full protection is in place. However, there remain a number of concerns. First, the Equality Act 2010 does not say that all protected characteristics are equal; nor does it say how conflicts between different characteristics are to be decided. As a result, the courts have to decide which rights are most important. The perception among many religious people is that religion and belief often come at the bottom of the pile. Secondly, the European Court of Human Rights can trump the UK and Scottish Governments. We heard at committee that the ECHR will not get involved if there is no such thing as same-sex marriage but, once same-sex marriage is permitted, will it switch to making it compulsory for churches and others to take part? If churches are considered to be providing a public service, the courts could act against them for providing that service only to some and not to others. That is effectively what has happened with adoption agencies. At the time that adoption by same-sex couples was permitted, well-meaning assurances were given that no agency would be forced to take part. However, we now have the situation where the Office of the Scottish Charity Regulator states that an agency cannot be a charity if it refuses to take part. Will permission turn to compulsion in a few years’ time? That is the concern of many of us. We looked at that issue in committee and received different legal views about what might happen in future. Members might have seen in the Equality Network’s briefing that Karon Monaghan QC said that it is “inconceivable” that the European Court would overturn the protections. However, that is only one half of the story. The other half is what Aidan O'Neill QC said, which was: “if marriage is extended to same-sex couples, it will become a human rights requirement that there be equality of treatment and regard. In a sense, that is what is important about the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill—it shifts the position in that regard.” He went on to say: “Therefore, I think that the Equality Act 2010 leaves open the possibility of conflict”.—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 19 September 2013; c 1500-01.] Not for the first time, we get a variety of legal opinion from a variety of legal experts. There is doubt whether the protections in place are robust; there are certainly no guarantees. In a similarly controversial area, namely abortion, there is specific provision for national health service workers to be able to choose whether to take part. That seems to me to be a reasonable compromise. The NHS as a whole provides the service, but individuals are given reasonable accommodation. If the bill is to go forward, I would like to see similar increased protection for the individual conscience and belief of public sector and other workers. I do not seek to impose Christian values on what is an increasingly secular society; nor do I seek to restrict the rights of anyone in society. I seek equality for each person in society, but I remain unconvinced by the assurances given and therefore I will vote against the bill.

I take Jackie Baillie’s point with regard to marriage specifically, but will she accept that some of the assurances for adoption agencies have proved not to be solid over time?

Can the member give us a definite position on whether, if the UK continues, its currency will be the pound? If so, how long will it have the pound, or will it adopt the euro?

4. To ask the Scottish Government how many passengers there have been on the Glasgow to Edinburgh line via Airdrie since it reopened. (S4O-02565)

I thank the Presiding Officer for the chance to ask a question for the first time in one and a half years and I thank the minister for his reply. Does the minister agree that projections of usage have tended to be on the cautious side? Figures such as the 22 per cent increase suggest that people might have been pessimistic, which might have discouraged other developments.

First, I think that we want to emphasise that rail is a good thing. Last night, we held an inaugural meeting of the proposed cross-party group on rail. I thank the 10 members who attended and others who want to be members of the group, but sent their apologies. I very much hope, despite some of the remarks in his speech, that I will be able to work with Neil Bibby, as co-convener of the group, to take it forward. The reality is that many, if not all, of us agree on the importance of rail and want to develop it, even though there can at any time be disagreements about the priorities. Let us be realistic about what has been achieved. In my case, the Airdrie to Bathgate link allows trains to run from Helensburgh all the way to Edinburgh. I mention that not least because it links six stations in the east end of Glasgow right through to Edinburgh. It was delivered on time and on budget, and I went on the first train. Of course it is desirable to have rail links to all airports. If I remember correctly from my SPT days, there was cross-party support for a rail link, as there was for a number of other rail and transport projects. One of Prestwick airport’s big advantages is its closeness to a railway station. When I go to visit other countries, I often use the train from the airport to the city centre, but not exclusively. The last time I flew to Rome, Paris, Athens and Brussels, I took buses to the city centres. I admit that I use the cheaper airlines, so that might be a factor. We have to live in the real world, where there are limited finances, even in the good times. That means that we have to set priorities in the transport budget. We can ask, “What if we didn’t have the Edinburgh trams scheme?” or “What if we didn’t need to replace the Forth road bridge?”, but the reality is that we were forced to spend money on both projects. We also have to set priorities between transport and other objectives. I am clear, and I think that most of my constituents in the east end of Glasgow are clear, that if we have to choose what to spend a limited amount of money on, housing has to be top of the list and transport must just accept its place. When setting priorities, we also have to remember that Glasgow airport, as has been pointed out, is exceptionally close to the city centre. The distance is some 8 miles and the journey takes only 20 to 25 minutes by taxi or bus. By comparison, Heathrow is 15 miles from the centre of London, and Gatwick is 29 miles. Hindsight is a wonderful thing. Should the Forth road bridge have been built differently? Yes. Should the Edinburgh trams system have been handled differently? Yes. Should the Scottish Parliament building have been built for less? Yes. Should the land for GARL have not been bought in the first place? Perhaps the answer is yes. However, it is not unusual for the public sector to sell a piece of land and then to have to make a further decision. For example, in Glasgow City Council, it was not an unusual situation that land was sold and then had to be bought back at an inflated price because, for example, we wanted to put the Commonwealth games on the site. The reality is that the people who authorised those projects considered that they were doing the right thing at the time, and in the case of SPT there was cross-party agreement that we wanted an airport rail link. We did not realise that the financial crisis was coming down the track towards us, so I think that it is somewhat unfair to go back now and criticise SPT or others who were involved in the decision. The motion also calls for an audit. I wonder what is meant by that, because the auditors are there anyway and are doing their job. Is that a criticism of present or past auditors?

Are we saying that the auditors, who are professional people, are not independent? Is this an attack on the accounting and auditing professions?

Will Mary Fee give way?

There has been some criticism that the cost of administering the UK system is quite high. Does the cabinet secretary think that administrative costs can be lower in Scotland?

I agree with Iain Gray: we welcome the new powers. Does he agree that the rate at which powers have come to the Parliament has been disappointingly slow?

I wonder whether the member is making a bit more of that issue than should be the case. My reading of the matter at face value was that the rate would not be any lower, so that is a commitment, and that mirroring means that the rates will perhaps be not exactly the same, but will be very close. That gives me quite a lot of clarity about where we are going.

Yesterday, one of my staff told somebody that I was the only MSP who was interested in the landfill tax, but that was a bit unfair. The Finance Committee has been quite enthusiastic about it, as have Malcolm Chisholm—although he sometimes hides the fact—Gavin Brown and John Swinney. We should not underestimate the significance of the Parliament’s gaining tax-raising powers, albeit that the vast majority of taxes are still controlled by Westminster. Whatever happens in 2014, 2015 and 2016, the Parliament is not satisfied with the powers that it has, will not be satisfied with the powers that it has been promised and will press for the people in Scotland to make more decisions for Scotland. Although, in the scheme of things, this is a relatively small tax, it is an important one because it brings together environmental policy, revenue raising and support for local communities. As with any tax in Scotland, we need to be aware of what our neighbours, especially England, are doing. As Malcolm Chisholm pointed out, a higher landfill tax is good for the environment, but there is little point in it if it only shifts waste across the border and we suffer a loss of revenue. The evidence at committee was that even small differences in rates could lead to waste tourism, which we need to guard against both on a cross-border basis and between the mainland and the islands within Scotland. The answer to the challenges that the islands face is to have different exemptions for them and perhaps slightly less strict standards in some cases, rather than to have different rates for different parts of the country. Therefore, the statement that the Scottish rate will mirror the UK rate and that the rate will be no lower than the UK rate in 2015 is pretty fair.

The member would have to ask people who are better placed than I am whether we are doing as much as we could. I still think that the direction that the bill takes, and the present situation whereby there are slightly different standards for islands and remote communities, is fair. There have been calls for greater certainty about rates and so on, a lot of which is crying wolf. Neither in the UK nor in Scotland can there be complete certainty about the future. One of the key aims of both Governments is to reduce waste by reducing, reusing and recycling, but that is notoriously hard to predict. The tenements in my constituency recently received grey recycling bins for food but it takes some time for people to get used to recycling.

Let me just finish the point. In some cases, I have seen the little waste receptacles being used as mini-buckets to store mops in, which is not what they were intended for. There is always a degree of resistance to such changes.

I have been thinking about the report every day since we wrote it, as I am sure Mr Brown has. The point is that of course we would all be happy to have more clarity, if that were possible, but there needs to be a bit of realism. On the landfill tax, as in other areas, we do not have facts about the future. We can make projections and estimates and we can have a vision, but we do not know all the facts about the future. We must be realistic about that. On unauthorised disposals, it is welcome that, in future, tax and fines will have to be paid. SEPA has a key role to play in that regard. We see small and large-scale dumping throughout the country, which we all agree needs to be clamped down on. SEPA’s resources must be kept under review, as that is an area of major concern for all our constituents. I welcome the Government’s response, which says: “Funding will take account of a range of factors, including compliance activity.” The block grant adjustment is one of the trickiest areas when it comes to the introduction of the landfill tax. Logically, the revenue that is received should fall, but the OBR has predicted that cash income will stay level. The Scottish Government response that receipts could fall by 74 per cent between 2015-16 and 2024-25 is pretty dramatic, and I certainly hope that that can be achieved, but the block grant adjustment must take account of that. All three block grant adjustments are the subject of negotiation between the Scottish and UK Governments. Although it would be my preference to have a distinct, transparent solution for each of the three taxes, I accept that the landfill tax is smaller, relatively, and that the Scottish Government may want to trade off a poorer settlement on one tax for a better settlement on another. I think that the 10-mile radius is probably too narrow in a rural area, but it is almost certainly too wide in an urban area. The bill team’s statement that “something a little more sophisticated”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 5 June 2013; c 2743.] was needed, which is referred to in paragraph 105 of the committee’s report, is very welcome. The Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill is the second of the proposed tax bills under the Scotland Act 2012. I very much welcome more control coming to Scotland. We must accept that we have limited room for manoeuvre on landfill tax, but we need to tackle the huge problem of waste that we face, and I believe that the bill gives us the opportunity to do so.

Does not the member accept that the indications that have been given are strong enough for people to make investment decisions, and that people do not need to know the exact detail down to the penny?

The Parliament has previously debated the Finance Committee’s report on employability, so we have discussed some of the issues before, but it is good to get a fresh angle on a number of them. Our young workforce is such an important area that we need to give it continual attention. Recommendations 1 and 2 primarily focus on schools, which is good. Schools must be aware of the opportunities that are out there for young people later on in life, and it is useful to have employers going into schools. Teachers cannot know about all the opportunities, but it is still important that they are as up to date as possible. The report seems to have a big emphasis on skills, but not so much emphasis on attitudes. I believe that attitude is important, and the Finance Committee heard that from employers. ASDA emphasised that attitude is one of the key things that it looks for when it is recruiting. Yesterday, I visited a local engineering company in my constituency, which has had apprentices in recent years. It has had bad experiences with some, mainly because of poor attitudes, and it had to let them go, but its current apprentices seem to be doing well. I was also told about an employee in a senior position in the company who started 28 years ago with no qualifications, but his attitude was superb from the start and he has acquired the necessary skills along the way. I was pleased to see at the end of the part of the report on schools mention of the importance of parents. We have sometimes underemphasised that. Parental influence can be both positive and negative. Many young people are strongly influenced by their parents, so if parents can be engaged in current job opportunities, their encouragement to think more widely can be extremely positive. However, it has to be said that some parents can have a negative influence. For example, a youngster might be encouraged at school to go on to college, but the reaction at home is, “Our family doesn’t go to college.” That kind of reaction is becoming less frequent, but sadly it still exists. Recommendations 3 and 4 concentrate on colleges. I like the emphasis on the local economy, and I accept that that can be defined in different ways. When the Finance Committee went down to Dumfries to take evidence, Elaine Murray and I felt that there was a bit of a disconnect in that there were local opportunities in, for example, hospitality and tourism, but there was a lack of local training opportunities in those fields. Recommendation 5 talks about the schools and colleges partnership. The transitional costs are mentioned. I think that there would be extra, one-off costs because some of the work has to be done earlier.

One of the points that I was going to make was about where the costs would come from, which is an issue. I did not see in the report exactly where they should come from. It specifically says that the Scottish Government, local authorities and colleges should work together, but I noticed that there was no mention of business involvement. That struck me as a little bit strange. The commission says elsewhere in the report that it wants business to be involved, but when it comes to meeting the costs, it does not seem to want business to be involved. The report specifically says that that would increase productivity. I presume that that means that businesses would benefit, so it seems to me that consideration should be given to business contributing at that stage. Recommendation 10 talks about “young people at risk of disengaging from education”. I thought that that part of the report was a bit weak. I accept that it is only an interim report, that other studies are referred to—for example, by the Smith group—and that there is little point in reinventing the wheel, but the only solid example that is given is activity agreements. I wondered whether we might have expected a bit more than that. The area is hugely important if we hope to help the most disadvantaged young people out of a cycle of several generations not working. Of course the individual has responsibility for herself or himself, but the best examples that we have heard about have often involved an adult putting a huge amount of time and effort into a young person’s life. Looking forward, I believe that we will get more about equalities, including disability, which I certainly welcome. The Equal Opportunities Committee recently did a report on women and work. The subject of girls moving into engineering and the STEM subjects in general has already been mentioned. Inclusion Scotland is a bit critical of disability being considered later on; it thinks that it should have been included at this stage. That is perhaps a little bit unfair. The report is an interim one; it is work in progress. Disability is so important that it deserves a focus in the final report in its own right. I presume that the alternative was not to have an interim report at all.

Finally, I will make some general points. The NUS briefing highlights the question of parity of esteem, which has already been mentioned. It is absolutely right. A real change of attitude is required among all of us. Just the other week, I got my boiler replaced. I did that with some trepidation, as I knew that major work was needed, but I was hugely impressed, especially by the range of skills that the one-man business that did the work possessed. He did the gas, plumbing and electrical work, bricked up the hole in the wall, did the admin and paperwork and even hoovered up the mess at the end. I did not want a doctor, lawyer or accountant doing that work—indeed, I did not want anyone with a degree doing it. I wanted someone with the appropriate skills, training and attitude, and I was extremely pleased by the result. As a society, we must learn to value all the skills that we have and need. Ranking people artificially will not benefit society as a whole or individuals. We should very much welcome the interim report, and I look forward to what is still to come.

On the point about the national minimum wage and the living wage, the living wage will always be partly voluntary. Would it not be better to have a national statutory living wage?

I thank Jackie Baillie for securing the debate. We discussed the rising cost of living yesterday, and much of the material in that debate is relevant for today’s debate. When I read some of the briefings for today’s debate, I wondered what line I would take, but I think that I want to concentrate on the contrast between wealth and poverty. Some have so much and some have so little. There will always be variations in society between the incomes of some and the wealth of others. I remember a previous boss of mine saying that people can be quite happy if someone else has a Rolls-Royce as long as they have a Mini. Perhaps that is the case, but when one person has two Rolls-Royces and their neighbour has no Mini or anything else, we know that something is definitely wrong. On Sunday, I attended two church services in my constituency—one Catholic and one Church of Scotland—and at both the reading was about the rich man and Lazarus, which I assume some members might be familiar with. Briefly, the rich man went through his life without really even noticing the poor man Lazarus who sat begging outside his house. If we do one thing today, I hope it is that we notice and re-emphasise that this is a problem. Whether we consider ourselves to be Scotland or the UK, we are a wealthy country, so why is there all this poverty? Part of the answer has to be about how the income and wealth are shared out—and they are not shared out very well. I am happy to accept that part of the answer is that we need better-quality jobs and better-paid jobs at the lower end. That links to having a living wage, which I hope will become statutory at some stage. That is the basic argument of “The Common Weal”, about which I know people have been speaking to both the Scottish National Party and the Labour Party. Many of us are sympathetic to that, but I do not think that that is the whole answer. I think that we need to accept that some people are getting too much. At least in the short term, the economy is not going to grow dramatically, so how we distribute income and the wealth of this country is significant. One option is to limit the income of those at the top, but that is easier said than done. The Green amendment to the motion that we debated yesterday—we did not actually discuss that amendment—suggested maximum pay ratios, which appeal to me in some ways. However, I know that they have been attempted in the past and have proven very difficult. The longer-term answer must be to challenge the underlying greed in all this of people who take 10 or 20 times more income than they pay some of their staff. That is also easier said than done, but at least it should be said.

The member and I have discussed the issue a few times and we will probably discuss it a few times more. Very briefly, I also have reservations about cutting any taxes, frankly. I think that the only justification for cutting corporation tax is to pull in more jobs and to bring in more tax through PAYE and so on. That is as far as I will go. We have to change attitudes. In many ways, that is probably beyond the power of this or any other Parliament. On the assumption that incomes will vary widely, the other option is to use taxation powers to redistribute. The present range of income tax, from 20 per cent to 45 or 50 per cent, is not very wide. When one adds national insurance, the starting rate is effectively 30 per cent. I was very disappointed when the 10 per cent rate was abolished. I would like the lowest rate to be 10 per cent again, inclusive of national insurance, and for it perhaps to go up in bands of 10 per cent. I remember when it was 98 per cent. That was probably too high, but we could go in that direction. I am pleased that we are talking about the subject today. We need to grow the economy, but whether or not we do that, we need to share our resources more fairly.

Will the member spell out to us what she thinks should be done?

I thank the Labour Party for bringing this important subject for debate. Members received a number of briefings, including one from the Child Poverty Action Group—an organisation that I think very highly of. I agree with the direction of travel in CPAG’s briefing, which talks about the need to maximise income and minimise essential outgoings for families in Scotland. I was particularly disappointed to read in the briefing that 20 per cent of children still live in poverty and that the number is forecast to rise by 65,000 by 2020. The Child Poverty Act 2010, which I think that all members supported—in the Scottish Parliament and at Westminster—was meant to cut child poverty to 10 per cent by 2020. Even that target was unambitious, given that the rate in other European countries is well below 10 per cent. At the time, people warned that Westminster legislation without resources would not eradicate child poverty. That has, I am sad to say, proven to be the case. On maximising income, the living wage is good but a statutory minimum wage is better. We struggle to get people to sign up to a voluntary living wage, whereas a statutory minimum wage is compulsory in the private and public sectors. People need a minimum to live on—we give that to prisoners and we should give that to everyone else. Part of someone’s income should be unconditional; only income on top of the unconditional element should be conditional. That is why it is so wrong to take money off people who have an extra bedroom, taking their income below the level that they need to live on. It is similarly wrong to make someone attend a job centre five days a week before they can get their benefits. To members who say that independence is a distraction from the main issues, such as poverty and the cost of living, I respond that I want independence so that we can stop struggling to impose a voluntary living wage and instead increase the statutory minimum wage to a proper level, on which people can actually live.

I am happy to argue that the statutory minimum wage should be £7.45, in line with the living wage. I do not think that anyone has fixed a figure for the minimum wage, but when I was at Westminster we repeatedly spoke in favour of a higher statutory minimum wage. We can hardly talk about reducing people’s outgoings without considering where the extra money is to come from—the issue has already come up. Is a free healthy lunch for rich kids the best use of resources? Where is the money to come from for more childcare? Let us not forget that good things are happening in relation to energy, albeit sometimes on a small scale. The Commonwealth games village has a district heating system and the new homes have higher insulation levels—members who go to see the new homes will see that they have tiny radiators. That will be the case for some 700 homes, a number of which will be socially rented. That is good news, but on a relatively small scale. It is not yet economically viable to build such homes, which are subsidised by the public purse. Energy costs are not helped by the profit element. It would have been better if gas and electricity had not been privatised—I did not take any shares when they were privatised. I have reservations about whether Labour can deliver an energy price freeze. There is a fear that a freeze would stifle investment in our future energy requirements and that companies would dramatically raise prices before the freeze came into effect. The Scottish Government, in partnership with local government, has delivered a council tax freeze. Of course if council tax were raised there would be more money for services, but we should remember that the tax is regressive, as Drew Smith said. Council tax increases hit hardest the people who are on a limited income, such as pensioners, so freezing council tax helps people who are on a fixed income.

I have already given way to the member. In the longer term, we want to replace the council tax with something fairer that is based on the ability to pay; nonetheless, in the meantime, a freeze is very welcome. There are some good points in some of the amendments. For example, the Greens demand waste reduction, and we should definitely go down that route. The Lib Dem amendment mentions overseas aid, which may be slightly off the point of the motion, but every time we talk about poverty we should remember those around the world who are in a much poorer state than we are. I will make a few comments on the exchange rate. One of the reasons for costs going up is that the value of the pound has been falling, and the value of the pound has fallen because the economy has been badly managed over a number of years. There was much rejoicing when the pound fell from around 70p to the euro to more like 80p as that was meant to boost exports—although I do not think that we have seen much growth in practice, at least at a UK level. However, the falling exchange rate has meant that anything imported now costs more, and for this country that means that quite a lot of things cost more. Although we may accept that some aspects of the increased cost of living are outwith the control of all Governments, we must be clear that the mismanagement of the economy by successive Westminster Governments is a major factor.

Let us make dealing with poverty a key focus in the Parliament, but if we are to hear new proposals from other parties let us have clear and costed alternatives as we move through the budget process.

We can start off the debate by being extremely positive about Scotland. Lots of good things have happened in Scotland in the past; lots of good things are happening in Scotland in the present; and even the dour pessimists have to accept that a lot of good things will happen in Scotland in the future. When I moved out of my parents’ home in my early 20s, it was not primarily so that I would be better off. In fact, in the short term, I might have been better off staying put and having my bills paid by my father. I moved out so that I could develop more as a person, have the freedom to make my own choices and live my life the way that I wanted to live it. In fact, some of the choices that I have made have been similar to what my parents would have chosen. However, I have no regrets about moving out from home at that time and I believe that many of the good things that have happened to me since then in my life have been because I have been living on my own. We are asked what exactly Scotland will be like if it is independent, but of course we do not know exactly what the UK or any other country would be like in the future—independent or not—so we cannot spend the whole debate going through the detail of what will and will not happen. We must not spend too much time getting too bogged down in what the costs and benefits will be in year 1. We need to look at the longer term—we need to look at the bigger picture. We need to look at things such as: how would Scotland’s attitude be changed by being independent? How would our confidence—about starting businesses and about lots of other things—be changed by independence? How would our standing in the world be changed by independence—or, as Alex Salmond said, how would we carry ourselves with independence? I believe that we would benefit from independence in the way that a student invests three or four years of their life in getting a degree. That is a major step and it is a sacrifice to start with, but it is for their benefit in the long run and they do better in the long run. There is a lot in the motion that we could speak on. I want to focus a little on what the UK has been like in recent years; what it is like now; and where it is going to be in the future. My first point is that the UK is far too small for the future. Once upon a time, there was a British empire and we could all trade with each other and ignore the rest of the world. Nowadays, however, we have some pretty big countries out there, including China with a population of 1.3 billion, India with 1.2 billion and the United States with 300 million. At 63 million, the UK is at best a medium-sized player. Whatever happens in the future, we must look beyond the UK. Of course we want good relationships with England, Wales and Northern Ireland, not to mention Ireland, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man. However, they are not big enough for us to grow our export market and to attract tourists from just those places. We need to be part of something bigger than the UK, and the European Union is the clear answer to that, so that neither Scotland nor the UK stands on its own. However, we want to be in partnership with other countries so that we can stand in the world on equal terms. We must move away from the narrow nationalism and parochialism that we see at Westminster and in the British media and become much more outward looking and international. If Britain is not the answer for our future, has it been a success until now? We have only to look around us and see. When I have been out round the doors, especially in some of the poorer areas, a lot of people have told me that things are so grim at the moment that they could not be any worse if Scotland was independent. That is not exactly a totally positive vision, but it says something about where a lot of people are. That is the answer to some of the points that Neil Findlay made. The UK has had 300 years to get things right and has failed. How much longer does he want to give it?

That is a bit unfair on the European Union, which I would view as considerably less liberal than the UK; some of our slightly better employment legislation has come from Europe in spite of the UK. We can also look at the Nordic countries. My argument is that we must be more outward looking. The UK is far too inward looking, narrowly nationalist and parochial. We want to break away from that, and be a much more outward-looking country. Britain is one of the most unequal developed countries in the world. Some people have fabulous wealth, while some families are struggling even to feed themselves. We must remember that Westminster was handling the economy and the banks when it all went pear-shaped. Yes, we should focus on the future, but we must also remember the track record of those who got us here. It is all very well to make assertions that Britain will do better in future, but is there any actual evidence that that will happen? Will Britain become more equal if we stay there? How exactly will that happen? I do not see much sign of it happening. What has been the recent history? This largely unequal society of ours hit problems a number of years ago, and we needed some—at least temporary—measures to right the ship. Would we do that by taking at least some money from the rich and powerful as an extra contribution, or would we squeeze those at the bottom a bit harder? I think that most of us would agree that it should not be the latter, but of course that is what happened. How would Britain get out of its problems? It would cut benefits to the poorest.

Is there any evidence that Britain will do things differently in future, or is that just an assertion?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

This year, the UK Government cut the budget by £107 million immediately before it was implemented. Has there been any explanation about that and any guarantee that it will not happen again next year?

Can the minister give us a timescale for when the campaign might start?

I joined the committee in October last year, which was part way through the evidence-taking sessions, so I was only involved in the report, “Where Gypsy/Travellers Live”. However, it became clear to me early on that this was a subject in which very slow progress was being made. The report starts by saying: “We are extremely frustrated”. I share that frustration and fully support the tone of the report. I should say also at this stage that I think that Mary Fee has been an excellent and fair convener of the committee. I was disappointed to hear that she was leaving, but I welcome Margaret McCulloch to the post. We have to accept that this is not an easy topic to deal with or even to discuss, and it is certainly not easy to find a solution that everyone will accept. However, the starting point is that we are dealing with a seriously disadvantaged minority group whose living conditions, with some exceptions, are frequently not acceptable and in relation to whom health and education provision is patchy to say the least. Over the years, we have changed our attitude and speech in relation to a number of minority groups. We are not as far on as we want to be as a society, but it is much less common nowadays to hear someone say that they do not want to live next to Jewish people, black people or gay people. However, it is not unusual to still hear people openly say that they do not want to live next to Gypsy Travellers. We not only hear that from individual citizens; we read it in the media and hear it from some politicians. That is not acceptable. As Mary Fee said, the EHRC’s briefing for today’s debate says, “relations between Gypsy/Travellers and the settled community is the single greatest community relations challenge the country faces”. In terms of the numbers involved, it might not be the biggest challenge, but in terms of how poor the relationship is, I have largely to agree with the EHRC. We have taken other minority groups in our society seriously, but it seems to me that we have not taken Gypsy Travellers seriously. It was clear from our witnesses that there have been particular issues in the north-east of Scotland, where the more vibrant economy has attracted this often mobile section of our population to jobs in the likes of Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire. That was brought home to me when I was campaigning in the Aberdeen Donside by-election. The subject came up a number of times on the doorsteps, and it was clear that it is a sensitive issue. I am not entirely clear why this debate has taken so long to happen, given that the report was published in March, but it has been suggested that it was delayed because it was too sensitive to discuss during the by-election. If that is the case, it is regrettable, but it underlines the sensitivity of the subject. So, whose responsibility is it to improve things? To some extent, it is the responsibility of all of us. I do not believe that we can say that it is only local councils who have to act. I totally support the independence of local government and believe that councils should be allowed to deal with issues in their remit in the way that they choose to do so. The concordat has been a big improvement on what went before and I fully support it. However, local councillors are clearly in a difficult position. Often, a majority of the electorate is openly hostile to any new site in the locality and it takes a lot of guts to support a new site when there is such clear local opposition. That is why we worded paragraph 49 in the way that we did. It says that “evidence strongly suggests a need for leadership from the Scottish Government in supporting the development of sites.” Members should note the word “supporting”. It continues: “We see this as being essential in supporting local authorities and elected representatives, both in bringing sites to fruition and setting an example against discrimination.” That is the way in which I want us to move forward. I do not want people to blame each other or say that only one person has to act on the issue. I want central Government to support local government, because this is a serious problem that will be solved only if we are all involved. It is not fair to leave local authorities to take everything forward on their own. We need national leadership from Government and Parliament in relation to achieving more sites and the wider aim of changing the tone of the debate. As has been mentioned, we were disappointed at COSLA's initial response. However, I must say that l am happier with Rory Mair’s more recent response to the committee’s letter of 27 June, in which he promised to give full consideration to the matters that were raised and consider reports to each of the executive groups in COSLA. Similarly, I am pleased that Shona Robison has an overarching responsibility for the equality portfolio, and that both she and Margaret Burgess are involved in this subject. I am happy to see that the Government’s response to the report says that it accepts that there is a problem. That is a good starting point. The question is: where are we going and how fast are we going? A number of groups and individuals are sceptical of more studies and more reports. At the very least, it would be helpful to have clear timescales or at least target timescales for how quickly new sites, in particular, can be provided. I think that we can all accept that Gypsy Travellers face a serious amount of discrimination. I also accept that there is a fair amount of good will in trying to improve things. However, I ask that, if one thing comes out of today’s debate, it is that there is more urgency about all of this.

I realise that I am one of the last speakers in the debate—in fact, I am the last back-bench speaker—so perhaps there are not many items to mention that have not already been touched on at some stage. However, I will start by mentioning three of the bills that I am particularly enthusiastic about. The first is the proposed revenue Scotland and tax powers bill. It seems to me that one of the key features of a real country is that it has its own taxes and its own tax system. Therefore, I am glad not only that we are getting the land and buildings transaction tax and the landfill tax, but that we will get revenue Scotland to oversee them. Although they are relatively small taxes to start off with, every journey starts with one small step, and once Scotland has a taste of operating its own taxation, it will be difficult to put the genie back in the bottle. We should not forget that it is estimated that revenue Scotland will cost 25 per cent less than would Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs doing the work. Second is the proposed housing bill. There are many aspects to that, and we will see more in due course. However, I particularly welcome the fact that there will be movement on the private rented sector. In parts of my constituency—I suspect that other members have seen the same thing—the private rented sector has grown in recent years in places where there was very little of it before. With that growth has come a number of problems, including tenants who have no commitment to the area, landlords who care nothing for communal maintenance, and letting agencies that take no responsibility. Of course, there are good tenants, landlords and letting agents, but I welcome the fact that there will be action on the sector. Third is the proposed licensing bill, which again covers issues that affect my constituency. Ever since I became a councillor about 15 years ago, the issues of taxis and private hire licences, the competition and tensions between the two, and the picking up of people in the centre of Glasgow to which the council has largely turned a blind eye, have all caused real problems. I am therefore delighted that there will be some movement in that area as well. Work on scrap metal dealers will also be very welcome. A church in my constituency has lost the lead off its roof twice within about six months, which is incredibly difficult for a small charity to deal with. We are also all aware of the travel disruption that has been caused by copper theft from the railways. Other key bills have already been mentioned such as those for welfare, food standards, and community empowerment, so I will not touch on those. Some bills have already been launched and are already working their way through Parliament, and members will not be surprised if I mention same-sex marriage, or the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill, to give it its proper title. Tomorrow morning, the bill starts its journey at the Equal Opportunities Committee, and I look forward to giving it a thorough examination. I have to say that I am not exactly enthusiastic about the whole concept of the bill, but I would be more relaxed about it if it was only about giving extra rights to lesbian, bisexual, gay and transgender people and not about endangering anyone else. We have assurances from the Scottish and Westminster Governments that there will be adequate protection for those who disagree, be they denominations or individual celebrants. We also have assurances about freedom of speech. My question is whether those assurances are deliverable or will be washed away by higher courts. Even then, it seems that there are fewer protections for public sector workers or third sector volunteers who speak out with their own personal views. We will look at all that in committee before we have our first debate on the subject in the chamber. The next topic that I will mention is the budget bill—a hugely important piece of legislation that is done each year and which dominates much of the work of the Finance Committee, as well as having an impact on all committees. I suppose if I was to make one request today to the other committees, it would be for them to make suggestions for the budget, but to please tell us where the money will come from. We had an example today from Mary Fee, for whom I have great respect, who suggested that we spend more money on housing, but did not tell us where she wants that money to come from. Jackie Baillie and Iain Gray also suggested that we could easily find £50 million to cover the bedroom tax: no problem, but where is that money to come from? During the summer, I met a number of housing associations in my area. The director of one said to me that we should find £50 million to cover the bedroom tax. To give him his due, he was more honest. He said, “Just cut the £50 million out of the culture budget.” Before the culture secretary falls over, I certainly do not agree that chopping money off theatres, music and museums would be a good idea for ordinary people who benefit from those things educationally and in other ways, but could not possibly afford them themselves. However, at least that housing association director was honest and straightforward in that he gave a clear alternative. I hope that we will, during the budget process, get that from Opposition members. Finally, it has been suggested that we should ignore the constitution and concentrate solely on bread-and-butter issues such as welfare reform and housing. Is that a fair point to make? No, it is not. We all, as individuals, have long-term and short-term plans; it is not about one or the other but about both. I thought that Christine Grahame put it particularly well when she showed how the two are inextricably linked. Let us not forget why our constituents are struggling with welfare cuts, why they are having to use food banks, why they are seeing college and housing funding being cut, and why we are living in one of the most unequal countries in the world. It is because we are in the United Kingdom that we are seeing those cuts, and that is why we have to leave.

Will Johann Lamont give way?

Is Willie Rennie assured by the reassurances that have been given that ministers, clerics and even denominations will not be dragged through the courts because the European Court of Human Rights can make the ultimate decision?

3. To ask the First Minister what effect the 2015-16 spending review will have on the Scottish Government’s budget. (S4F-01504)

Does the First Minister agree that the chancellor is attempting to hide the cuts to the capital budget with loans that Scotland will have to pay back in due course and that that is fooling no one? Does the First Minister further agree that next year’s referendum offers Scotland the chance to choose a fairer future, free of Westminster’s damaging economic policies that threaten this country’s recovery?

The member makes the point that one of the reasons for the great loss of life was advances in technology. How does he feel about the claim that there was a disdain on the part of some officers for the number of ordinary people who lost their lives?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the new name for any college should be as inclusive as possible and should not suggest that one college has taken over the other two?

Does the member accept that all the evidence that the Finance Committee took came from business representatives and that we did not hear from normal residents and constituents of the country? We must act on their behalf, not just on behalf of business.

I agree with what the member is trying to do, but does he feel that it is the most effective way of doing it? There would be a cost. Would it not be better to use the money either to reduce council tax or to give a direct grant for energy efficiency?

Does the member accept that although, overall, the measure would be revenue neutral, if a bit more tax is to be raised from one person and spent on someone else, there would be a cost?

As I said in my intervention, I have a lot of sympathy for the aim of Patrick Harvie’s amendments and what he is trying to do. Although Malcolm Chisholm said that he drifted from being sceptical to being positive, I think that I went the other way after the committee had listened to the evidence, which, I have to say, was not very convincing at all. At first, several of us thought that something like this might be feasible. However, when we considered the suggestion in detail, it became apparent that it was a very blunt instrument. As I have tried to point out already, there is a cost to the proposal, even if, overall, it is revenue neutral. If we are going to raise a bit more tax, the question is, what is the best that we can do with those resources? I am far from being convinced that the best thing to do is to create incentives through LBTT, when, perhaps, we could do better by using a grant to directly help people to improve their homes, or a council tax reduction, which would give them an incentive immediately, or at least the following year. The kind of adjustment that we are talking about helps people only if the house is sold or purchased. If a house is not sold or purchased, there is no incentive whatever. Malcolm Chisholm suggests that the proposal is a way of raising awareness. I think that there are other and perhaps better ways of raising awareness. The strongest reason against the proposal, for me, is that a lot of my constituents are buying houses for less than £100,000. That means that they will pay no LBTT, so there will be no incentive. The amendment would affect better-off people in the bigger houses, and would do nothing for the less well-off people in the smaller houses. For me, that is a convincing argument that this is not the way in which to use the limited resources that we have.

Does the member accept that Chancellors of the Exchequer at Westminster tend to make tax announcements quite late in the day?

It has been fascinating to follow the progress of the bill, which introduces the first new tax in this Scottish Parliament. That is both exciting and symbolic. As we start the process of replacing UK taxes with more appropriate Scottish taxes, it does no harm to repeat the four principles of Scottish taxation, which the cabinet secretary has laid down, having drawn them from Adam Smith: they are the burden being proportionate to the ability to pay; certainty; convenience; and efficiency of collection. It is also worth saying again that tax is a good thing. We live in a world where many complain of paying too much tax and where there is an idea that, for some days in the year, everyone is working for the Government. However, that is clearly not true. We pay tax for the good of our fellow citizens. The Parliament has a duty to argue for taxation and to say why it is both necessary and good. Gavin Brown, who is not here at the moment, made a point about witnesses coming to the committee. Of course, people come to committee with special interests, but we have a responsibility to all the citizens of this country. They are not always at our committee meetings, and we must take their views into account. I welcome the principle of simplicity in the bill and the fact that the cabinet secretary has resisted the requests for a range of reliefs. On the surface, some of those might have seemed attractive, but they could open the door to those who seek to artificially avoid paying the tax. We have debated the issue of encouraging environmentally friendly housing. We all want to encourage that, but I continue to believe that the money would be best used to finance grants or reductions in council tax, rather than a tax reduction. The question of when rates should be announced has been discussed. We have not spent a great deal of time on the block grant adjustment. That is an issue for all the new taxes—LBTT, the Scottish rate of income tax and landfill tax. It certainly should be simpler to work out the formula for LBTT than for the Scottish rate of income tax, for example. However, we cannot have the same system for all three taxes. The Finance Committee will want to keep a close eye on the discussions between the two Governments. Something exciting is happening here today. For the first time, the Parliament is introducing a new tax. I accept that it is a small tax that replaces a similar existing one, but there is something symbolic about that. Until now, only the block grant has been available to us and we have had choices about how to spend it. Now, for the first time, we will be able to raise some of our own revenues. The ability to raise tax was a key issue on the road towards independence for the United States. At that time, London made serious mistakes in how it handled things. Westminster has over the years made serious mistakes in its quest to hang on to Scotland, too. First, it made the mistake of giving us our own Parliament, which has only helped to boost Scotland’s sense of identity and our ability to do things ourselves. Now, it is giving us the power to raise some of our own taxes. Again, that could be a serious misjudgment on its part. The more powers we have and the better we use them, the more likely it is that we will go the whole hog and opt for complete freedom. Especially for that reason, I very much welcome the passage of the bill.

I, too, thank John Wilson for his motion. It seems to me that, as a society, we need to move on a number of fronts: to improve the level of financial education; to reduce the level of indebtedness; and to encourage responsible, rather than irresponsible, lending. I think that some good things are happening in financial education. Commercial lenders and credit unions are often in our schools to encourage young people to budget and to save. More widely, there has grown up a culture of borrowing that we certainly need to break. Most recently we have seen the sad state of affairs at Hearts, but we have seen that across the board, with Governments, businesses and individuals borrowing too much. We have to say that borrowing is by no means always a bad thing if it is responsible and can be repaid. It might well be used for an unexpected crisis or for planned bigger expenditure, such as for a car or house—an asset that, we hope, will last for several years, during which time the loan can be repaid. Sadly, however, in recent years many people have become hopelessly swamped in debt, and very often the guilty party has been the irresponsible lender. For me, that has to be the key advantage of credit unions. More than any other lenders that I am aware of, they want the best for the borrower and not just a quick profit for themselves. It has clearly been a challenge to grow credit unions over the years. We have already heard about a few other countries that seem to have been more successful, such as Ireland and Canada, which have much higher membership figures. In 2010, Ireland had more than 3 million members out of a population of 4.5 million, which is 66 per cent membership. Canada had 10.6 million members out of a 33 million population, which is about 30 per cent. The membership rates in the economically active population are even higher, with Ireland at 75 per cent and Canada at 46 per cent. In Scotland, the figure sits at about 6 per cent, although I understand that the figure in Glasgow is about 25 per cent. A good example is the Glasgow Credit Union, which had 20,000 members in 2008 and now, I believe, has 32,000 members. It has been argued that credit unions in this country have sometimes been seen as very close to the establishment, even though they are independent. Alternatively, as Mary Scanlon just said, they have been seen as being mainly for poorer people. In other countries, credit unions seem to be seen as much more distinct from Government and have memberships from right across society. If that is the case, public funds might not always be the best way in which to grow credit unions. However, given that we are where we are, I agree that encouragement of credit unions through the expansion project is to be welcomed. Neil Findlay suggests that the Scottish Government should put more money into credit unions, but he needs to explain where that money is to come from, whether it is a cut in the health service or whatever.

I am sorry, but I am pushed for time. Given the lack of confidence in the banking system, now is clearly the right time to encourage better alternatives. However, I say in passing that not all banks are bad. My constituency has one branch of the Airdrie Savings Bank, which I consider to be the traditional type of bank with a personal service that we certainly want to encourage. A number of local credit unions are based in my constituency, but one national one that is based there is the Scottish Police Credit Union in Barrachnie, which I am delighted to have and which I visited last month. That credit union has recently launched a new product called flexiloan or revolving credit, which is a good example of a credit union coming up with a new product to challenge some of the less scrupulous lenders. The flexiloan has an APR of 9.9 per cent, which seems pretty reasonable to me. Of course, many of us—even those on decent salaries—can face particular challenges at the end of the month, so the more alternative decent products that are available, the better. Having spoken to the Scottish Police Credit Union, I know that it is keen for other credit unions to make use of its work and to develop the products that it has invented. There is no point in reinventing the wheel. I am happy to support the motion and I hope that we can make progress in growing the credit union movement.

I agree very much with the theme of the member’s comments. When we are dealing with health, for example, we deal with young people in a different way and give them extra support and so on. Would the member say that the UK Border Agency has a responsibility to deal with young people more sensitively?

I am very glad to take part in the debate. I will touch on three areas. First, we can obviously celebrate the guardianship service, which has been established for a couple of years. Secondly, we can acknowledge refugee week. Thirdly, however, we must regret how many refugees there are in the world. First, we can celebrate the guardianship service. I have to admit that I was not very familiar with the whole concept of guardianship, but the more I have learned about it, the more positive I have become. When I think of myself aged 15 or 16, I am not at all sure how I would have coped if I had been dumped on my own in a strange and perhaps seemingly hostile country. In education, in health and in other spheres, we rightly do not treat young people exactly the same as we treat adults. The same should apply in immigration—young people should be treated more carefully. I am not a fan of the UK Borders Agency; it seems to be an organisation that is designed to keep people out of England, which is seen as an overpopulated country. However, that is clearly not the case in Scotland—we very much need to grow our population, so our starting point is probably different, in that we can be more relaxed about welcoming people here. On reading the evaluation of the guardianship pilot, it is encouraging to see that progress has obviously been made during the two years in which it has been operating. It states that in year 1 there were often tensions and disagreements regarding the roles and responsibilities of guardians, in particular in relation to other service providers—especially statutory service providers, including social workers. However, in the second year, it seems to have been broadly agreed that interventions by guardians are very helpful. I especially like the description of the guardianship role as “filling gaps in resources and services in a timely way” and the comments that the guardian “had time to get to know the young person” and “provided them with a level of acceptance and support”. That raises an interesting point about some of our public services. There is sometimes a danger that advice and support are seen as needing to be wholly cold, objective, and impersonal. In fact, sometimes there can be a positive fear of a relationship developing between the person helping and the person being helped. That happens not only in the public sector; it happens in the voluntary sector, too. It sometimes seems that it is felt that it does not matter who gives advice, but that approach leaves out the importance of trust, confidence and similar issues. By contrast, I was encouraged to read the 10 core standards of guardianship practice, especially standards 7, 8, and 9. Standard 7 says: “The Guardian treats the child with respect and dignity” and “shows a flexible approach tailored to the individual needs of the child”. Standard 8 says: “The Guardian forms a relationship with the child built on mutual trust, openness and confidentiality.” Again, that emphasises the relationship. Standard 9 says: “The Guardian is accessible” and “can be reached easily, lives near enough .. the child to be able to respond quickly … and contacts the child … when there is no specific need to do so.” l see all that as being extremely positive. Perhaps we could learn from that model in relation to other areas of child care.

I thank the minister for making that point. Some of the most successful outcomes that we have seen with regard to children in care have involved there being, in a young person’s life, one adult who performs above and beyond the call of duty, even after the young person has left care. On refugee week, it has to be said that we now have many designated days and weeks when we remember events and highlight issues. That is a good thing, although I suppose that there is a danger that the number of such events can dilute their impact. I am more than happy to welcome refugee week Scotland, because the sad fact is that, although the focus of today's debate is on young refugees in Scotland, we are seeing only the tip of the iceberg here; there is a huge problem worldwide. Murdo Fraser mentioned some of the figures. The UNHCR figures show that there are around 10 million refugees worldwide. However, when we add other groups, including internally displaced persons, of whom there are some 15 million, we get to the figure that is given in the briefing from the Scottish Refugee Council and the Aberlour Child Care Trust, which suggests that there are 34.5 million “people of concern”, of whom nearly half are young people under the age of 18. As I said, we must regret that there are so many refugees. The definition of “refugee” in Wikipedia is: “a person who is outside his or her country of origin or habitual residence because they have suffered (or fear) persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, political opinion, or because they are a member of a persecuted 'social group' or because they are fleeing a war or natural disaster.” There have always been people who flee a regime or another group of people, and I suspect that there always will be. Often, we cannot have much influence over the causes of the fleeing, so first and foremost it is right that we protect the victims and give them whatever help we can and that they need. However, that is not to say we should not be doing more to prevent people from becoming for refugees and asylum seekers in the first place. Sometimes we, or our countries, have been partly responsible, for example, by supplying arms to despotic regimes for use against their own citizens, or for going to war against neighbouring countries. We might also have been guilty of not speaking out enough—or at all—about unacceptable situations around the world. That can be tricky, because we western powers have an unpleasant record of colonialism and of telling Asian and African countries how they should run themselves. We do not want to repeat those mistakes. Ideally, we should have not have been in Iraq and Afghanistan, but we cannot undo that now, and we should be speaking out for minorities there, and in countries such as Egypt and Syria, where people are being pressured to leave and, potentially, to become refugees. We can be positive about the guardianship service and we can recognise refugee week, but we must also regret that there are so many refugees around the world.

If the member wants cuts reversed, will he tell us where he wants the money to come from? Is it to come out of the health service?

I thank Paul Martin for bringing this important subject to the chamber. I would have signed his motion, most of which I agreed with, but for the fact that he blamed the Scottish Government for the cuts, when it is clearly not to blame. I worked for housing associations for a number of years and I really believe that they are a key player in our society and perhaps the key player in poorer areas and constituencies such as Paul Martin’s and mine. I welcome a number of housing association representatives to the chamber. I know that West of Scotland Housing Association is here, as are Queens Cross Housing Association, Milnbank Housing Association and a number of others. I know of no other type of organisation in the third sector in my constituency that combines such a high level of voluntary involvement with the level of professional resources that housing associations have. Having worked for and known housing associations of various sizes, I favour associations with a stock of less than 3,000, which provides a good balance between professionalism and tenant control. I was never in favour of Glasgow Housing Association at all, which was always going to be too big. I am disappointed when I hear of small local housing associations, including one recent example from my constituency, being swallowed up by giants from elsewhere. Housing is the number 1 issue that constituents come to see me about and it remains the top priority for me in capital spending priorities. I especially welcome the fact that the Commonwealth games village in the east end of Glasgow will be turned partly into a care home and partly into social housing. Another concern is the private rented sector. It can be very good at times, but some of our most vulnerable citizens suffer at the hands of dubious private landlords or agents in a way that I know would not happen if they were tenants of a community-based housing association. The debate appears to be about yet another list of Labour wishes. Two weeks ago, Labour members told us that they wanted more money to be spent on expensive cancer drugs, even though that would presumably mean cuts in housing and transport budgets. Last week, they told us that they wanted more money for transport, even though that would presumably mean cuts in medicines and housing budgets. This week, they tell us that they want more money for housing, even though that would presumably mean cuts in drugs and transport budgets. When will Labour politicians join us in the real world? The reality is that we have a pretty much fixed amount of money. All parties are welcome to tell us that they would spend more on housing and less elsewhere, but they should tell us where the savings would come from. On the other hand, they could spend the housing money differently. For example, we could have a higher percentage of HAG but fewer houses, or a lower percentage of HAG and more houses. Alternatively, we could have more specialist houses, which tend to be more expensive, but build fewer houses in total. That was suggested at the Finance Committee during our recent inquiry into demographic change. Those are all valid choices, but we expect politicians who disagree with our choices to give us their alternatives.

I am sorry; I have only four minutes and I am now in my last minute. The reality is that some housing associations have free reserves on top of their cyclical and designated reserves. Of course such reserves can be used only once, but that is not to say that they should not be used at all. For example, a housing association in my constituency fairly recently bought flats off the shelf from a private developer. Those flats might not be up to the high spec that we normally get from housing associations, but that has meant more social rented housing in the area and I very much welcome that. If we can get more houses for less public money, even if only for a few years, that is a good route when money is tight. Having savings and reserves is a good idea—we need that throughout society—especially for housing associations. Of course there must be ring-fenced reserves but, if there are free reserves, let us see them used. We should support community-based housing associations and make housing our number 1 priority, but we should also be realistic. Scotland’s budget has been cut, and that is a sign that the UK system has failed.

I thank all the members who have given me the opportunity to have the debate today. Some time ago, the Royal Bank of Scotland announced that it was closing its Bridgeton branch in my Glasgow Shettleston constituency. It closed the branch earlier this year. To an extent, we accepted that that was inevitable. Cuts were being made across the board in society and in the banks, so perhaps we did not put up much of a fight. However, in the very same week that RBS closed the branch, it announced that it would also close the Shettleston branch—no consultation, no asking for opinions, just a decision that had already been made. I was furious about that. That would leave only one branch of the Royal Bank of Scotland in my constituency of some 70,000 people. To be fair, RBS agreed to meet me. It told me how wonderful the one remaining branch would be—it even had a machine there that would give out £5 notes. That is really wonderful, is it not? Around the same time, I attended a meeting of Sandyhills community council and quickly picked up that it was not just me who was seriously upset; the community as a whole was furious about the decision. We therefore agreed to put together a petition and collected more than 1,000 signatures from local residents and others who came into the area, often specifically to use that branch. It is not just the bank’s customers—individuals and businesses—who suffer in such a situation; the danger is that footfall will drop for all the other shops in the area and that it will cause problems for a number of other businesses, including, in this case, the credit union, which is very close by. Members may be aware that Labour and the Scottish National Party do not always have the closest of relationships in the east end of Glasgow; in fact, we do virtually nothing together unless we are absolutely forced to. However, on this occasion, given the strength of feeling in the community council and among the wider public, I felt that we had to try to bring everyone together. There is nothing like having a common enemy such as RBS to draw normally antagonistic politicians together. The campaign has been led by Sandyhills community council and supported by Shettleston and Tollcross Credit Union, Margaret Curran MP, the ex-MSP Frank McAveety, local councillors and me. The role of community councils can be important in relation to such issues. They are non-party political and cover a smaller distinct area than even city councillors do. I admit that I have had clashes with community councils in my time, but the campaign has been an example of how they can be a real asset to a local community. On a cross-party basis, with the credit union and the community council, we went to Gogarburn to hand in our petition. Again, to be fair, RBS accepted it and was reasonably polite, but it was not exactly enthusiastic. What are the bank’s arguments for closing the branch? One argument is that there are fewer customers than there used to be. Of course I can accept that numbers may be down a little, but people who go into that branch—as I do, and as other members may have done—often have to queue to get served. It is a busy branch. Another argument is that more customers are using online banking. I am afraid that that argument upsets me somewhat. We know that fewer people are online in poorer areas; in fact, Glasgow Housing Association has found that only 10 per cent of social housing tenants have regular access to online facilities. Across the parties, we have been concerned that the bank has sought to move down the online route, which will clearly disadvantage many of our constituents. The Department for Work and Pensions is another example of an organisation going down that route. Many people want to speak face to face to their local politician or their bank—they do not want to do things online. That may well come in the future, but we are a long way away from a majority of our constituents being comfortable with going online for a range of services. In the Parliament, we debate finances—whether they are Government finances, organisations’ finances or individuals’ finances—often enough, and on many occasions we do not agree with one another. However, I think that there is broad agreement on some issues, such as the need to improve financial education in our schools and, beyond young people, in the wider community. Debt has been a huge problem right across society, and we all need to learn from mistakes that have been made in the past.

Absolutely. That is ironic. To be fair, I have visited St Anne’s primary school, where the local RBS staff did a perfectly good job in encouraging the kids. I make it clear that the local staff are absolutely fine—I am sure that that is true in virtually every RBS branch. Today, I want to challenge the top decision makers today. To close a bank branch in an area such as Shettleston goes completely against the financial education agenda that we are trying to achieve of helping people to manage their finances better. We might ask whether all the banks are closing such branches, and the answer is no. In the past week, I read an article in The Herald about Santander, which specifically said that it was not closing branches. If that bank does not need to close branches, I do not understand why RBS, which is much more deeply embedded in our communities, needs to do so. One more thing that really infuriates me about all of this is that we—the public—actually own RBS. It is not just any other bank but one that has been bailed out by the public purse. One might just think that it owes some extra duty to the public in return. That point is not lost on my constituents. What is RBS’s response? It has offered us a further meeting to explain why it is closing the branch, but there is no offer of a meeting to discuss whether it should close the branch. I realise that the Government has limited influence on the situation, but I would be grateful for any reassurance that the Government sees this as an important issue and will raise it with RBS on behalf of not just my constituents but vulnerable constituents across Scotland. Can we see any signs of improvement in RBS’s attitude? Its report for 2012 runs to many hundreds of pages, from which I have selected just one or two. To be fair to RBS, it accepts that it has got it wrong in the past. However, I am concerned about where it seems to think that it is now. For example, on page 8, under the heading “Our customers”, RBS states: “Successful companies put their customers first. If they do not serve customers well they have no purpose. Without satisfied customers there is no return for shareholders, no jobs for employees, no sales for suppliers and no taxes to support public services. Most of us at RBS get up every day with the aim of serving our customers well.” I am afraid that most of us in Shettleston are not convinced that the decision makers in RBS are getting up every day with the aim of serving their customers well.

Mr Smith and the minister referred to regional selective assistance. I want to press the minister a little more on how he feels RSA is working and whether it has been successful in attracting jobs and protecting the money that has gone into it.

I am not on the committee, but I read its report with interest. Can Murdo Fraser explain why, when we deal with employment and unemployment figures, we do so in hard facts, but when we talk about underemployment we say that people “may wish” to work and that others “feel” that their skills are not utilised? It seems to be a little bit subjective.

Does the member agree that part of the answer might be, at school level, to line up young people with where the jobs will be in the future?

Will the member give way?

Whose fault is it that those companies are not paying corporation tax?

It is good that the report and the study behind it have been produced and that we are able to debate the report today. I congratulate the committee on its work. There is always a danger that, as has been mentioned, we get fixated on one or two key statistics, such as employment or unemployment figures. Those are obviously important, but we can forget to look at the detail behind the figures, which in this instance means not only the employment numbers but the quality and type of employment that is available. The fact that I have been on one or two other committees—not the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee—over the past year or so gives an added relevance to the report’s consideration. For instance, I am on the Equal Opportunities Committee, which is preparing a report on women and work, so I feel that I should make a few comments on the gender dimension of underemployment, although others—including Alison Johnstone—have mentioned that already. The figures of 8.7 per cent for male underemployment and 11.3 per cent for female underemployment must concern us. One example that has come up a lot at different committees and in different reports is of women returning to work after having children. They are often forced to downgrade their aspirations to get part-time or flexible employment. We will have more on that when we come to the Equal Opportunities Committee report in due course. During the Finance Committee’s study of employability and the Equal Opportunities Committee’s study of women and work, skills alignment has come up. I am glad that that has been touched on in the debate and in the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report. In the Finance Committee and the Equal Opportunities Committee, we have heard reports of good work being done to encourage young people, especially young women, to think a bit out of the box and not just drift into the kind of job or training that their families have traditionally done. Although higher and further education establishments are important in that, we need to start earlier. Schools definitely have a role to play. That can include bringing people from different sectors into a school to broaden young people’s thinking, because we must accept that teachers often do not have broad experience of the outside workplace. Students with excellent qualifications—for example, in politics or history—are still queueing up at our doors looking for work experience, while companies such as Scottish Power and SSE and the North Sea sector in general are crying out for engineers and people with similar skills. I was therefore particularly glad to see paragraph 74 of the report, which says: “In evidence to the Committee, the Cabinet Secretary confirmed the importance of the higher and further education sectors being aligned with the Scottish Government’s Economic Strategy. He acknowledged that, ‘For far too long now, there has been a disconnect between the aspirations of the business community with regard to where growth will come in the economy and our education community’s planning assumptions about where the emphasis should lie.’ In particular, he highlighted the growth in the oil and gas and renewables sectors and the ‘significant skills shortages in engineering’.” That is one of the conclusions at paragraph 82. We should accept that underemployment or even skills underutilisation is not always a bad thing. For example, some of my fellow accountants might feel that I was not currently using all my accounting training in the job that I am doing. That might be true to some extent, but it is out of choice, and I consider what I am doing to be a high-quality job. However, accountancy is a great background for a range of career options. Similarly, we must not undervalue the graduate mother or father who deliberately stays at home with their young children to give those children what they feel is the best start in life. As I mentioned in an intervention, I note the committee’s definition of skills underutilisation in paragraph 3, which says: “the term ‘skills underutilisation’ is used to describe those people who would welcome the opportunity to work at a skills level which better matched their training, qualifications or experience.” I am grateful to Marco Biagi for explaining a bit more that some of the research is more objective than I had picked up from the report. However, it still seems strange that we measure employment and unemployment in definite terms but are a bit more vague and subjective when we talk about underemployment. There is a cost to the individual and the household, but we must not forget the cost to the wider economy. Margaret McDougall mentioned that. Given that underemployment involves not using our national resources to best effect, it is not an extra that we would like to deal with—it is a key economic challenge for the whole country. Having mentioned voluntary underemployment, I think that it is important to point out that underemployment is for most people neither desirable nor voluntary. Duncan McNeil put that extremely well when he described the effect of people being in no-hope jobs. One aspect of the issue that several members have mentioned is zero-hours contracts. That highlights the need to control employment law. The European Union has often tried to improve employees’ rights while reluctant Westminster Governments have been dragged along kicking and screaming. As part of that process, the minimum-wage legislation needs to be strictly enforced, because we hear stories of people who are paid for one hour here and there but who are not paid for their travelling time in between. I was intrigued by Ken Macintosh’s comment that Australians are happier than we are. There is a serious point to that. I lived in Nepal for three years, where I would say that the people were also happier than people here, even though it is a very poor country. To go back to Duncan McNeil’s point, the issue is not just about money, although money is key; factors such as job satisfaction and hope for the future are important, too. The other thought that strikes me about Australia is that it left the British empire and has never asked to come back.

Will the member give way?

The member touched on the definition of underemployment and he has talked about collecting data. Does he agree that there are practical problems with that? If underemployment is based on each individual person’s attitudes and what they want, how is it possible to collect data on it in an objective way?

Does Elaine Murray accept that there are things that we would all like to see for the railways, but that there are realistic options and then a wish list? Can she suggest what she would have cut in order to fund some of those other projects?

It seems fair on such occasions that we should both comment on the current situation and express hopes for the future. I would like to do both. We have had two useful receptions at Holyrood recently, one with the Office of Rail Regulation and, on Tuesday, one with Virgin. I thank both for the opportunity to have extremely interesting discussions with a number of experts. At the Virgin reception, there was a reminder that there was a suggestion not that long ago that the only railways in Scotland would be between Glasgow and Edinburgh and between each city and London. When we think about what might have happened, we can be extremely positive about where we are now and about the fact that, for example, ScotRail had 83.2 million passengers in 2012-13. It is not only that there have not been the closures that were suggested at one stage; there have been some real steps forward. Members will not be surprised that I want to mention the Airdrie to Bathgate railway line, which is obviously my favourite railway line. Based on the points that were made earlier, I accept that the legislation was passed under a previous Administration and I understand that the final funding decision was made under the current Government—there was a combination of the two. That rail link has meant that the east end of Glasgow and, further west, Milngavie and Helensburgh have direct routes through to the capital. Dalmarnock station is even more local for my constituency. That station is to be the main one for the Commonwealth games. It was very run down and poorly used, but it has had an £11 million refurbishment, I think, and has recently reopened, although the building is not quite finished. If I picked up correctly what the minister said, the electrification of the Whifflet line is being sped up, which is tremendous. Three stations in my constituency—at Carmyle, Mount Vernon and Baillieston—are included. On a wider scale, perhaps one of the best improvements on the railways over recent years has been the availability of much better information to passengers—I do not like the word “customers”. Even at a relatively small station, such as mine at Garrowhill, there are now screens on both platforms that show the next three trains, estimated times of arrival and major announcements on storm damage or flooding, for example. On top of that, there are announcements over the public address systems. The situation is much better than it used to be. The announcements on the trains vary a bit, and some drivers volunteer much more information than others do, but there is no question but that there has been an improvement over recent years. It is clear that a lot of this debate will be about future projects—things that we would like to happen. We can split those into three categories: projects that are beginning to happen now, such as EGIP and the Borders line projects; the high priorities for the future; and the wish list. We all have a wish list of pet projects that we would like to happen if we had pots of money. On the projects that are beginning to happen, I recently drove down to Galashiels to take part in a meeting with Murdo Fraser. I confess that that was the first time that I had been down that way for a while. I was hugely impressed when I was driving down the road. It seemed that every few hundred metres, there was a sign about the work on the railway that was going on and the access to the work sites. It is clear to me that a dramatic amount of work is going on there. I will mention a few improvements that I would like to see. I would certainly welcome the electrification of the lines into the Queen Street high-level station. I think that the Jacobs report on the issue came out around the same time as we previously debated the railways, so we did not really have time to look at it properly. I also welcome the idea of having longer platforms at Queen Street that would allow four eight-car trains per hour rather than six six-car trains, which was originally suggested and which would have meant much more complex signalling. As one of my colleagues said, if the same result can be produced for less money, that is surely a success. If the minister could give us an update on the timescales for the work at Queen Street, I would be interested in that. The idea of more through trains has been a theme. For a number of years, more through trains have been seen as a good thing to take pressure off city-centre termini. The route from Helensburgh to Edinburgh via the Queen Street low-level station has already been mentioned. The Argyle line was previously reopened, of course, and that gave routes from Lanarkshire to Dunbartonshire via Glasgow Central low-level station. The next obvious through route would be from Ayrshire and Renfrewshire—which, for Mr Adam’s information, includes Paisley—via crossrail to Edinburgh, using an existing line. For those who are not familiar with that line, it used to serve St Enoch station in Glasgow. Those lines are currently in use and available but they are not electrified. For relatively little cost, the necessary 1.8 miles could be electrified. I accept that it would be more expensive in the longer term to put in a station at Glasgow Cross, but doing that would also have a tremendous economic impact on the east end of Glasgow. I have a few other pet projects, such as a station at Parkhead on the Airdrie to Bathgate line. I want also to mention ticketing, which has been referred to already. The letter that Tavish Scott read out from The Scotsman went on to talk about triangular journeys, which is a particular interest of mine. Sometimes I go from Glasgow to Perth to Edinburgh and then back to Glasgow in the one day and there seems to be no way of coping with that within the ticketing system. Similarly, many members travel to Edinburgh three times a week but we cannot get vouchers and have to pay cash every day on the train. More widely, people say to me that the bus is cheaper than the train, and we need to consider that. In conclusion, I am very enthusiastic about rail. Of course we all have our wish lists of what we want to see, but we have to accept that there have been huge improvements in recent years.

Will the member accept at least one point: that the longer trains are an improvement on what was planned previously?

Some housing and homelessness-related issues affect people of all ages, young and old. However, some of the issues particularly affect young people or affect them more severely. The lack of suitable accommodation has been mentioned. Alex Johnstone referred to that, but he forgot to say that the right-to-buy scheme was a major mistake. That scheme reduced the amount of housing that is available. He also omitted to say that there was a shortage of money for new housing because of the Westminster cuts. Although I normally have a lot of time for Malcolm Chisholm, he talked about the housing grant being too low, but failed to say whether he would want a higher housing grant, which would mean fewer houses being built, or whether he would take money out of the health service, for example, and put that into housing. Lack of suitable housing is clearly a problem. That is being made worse by Westminster’s bedroom tax and other welfare cuts. The fact that the right to buy has been curtailed is a welcome step towards improving the social housing supply. However, of major concern is the private letting market. It seems that some landlords have seen that market as a quick way to make a profit, but take little responsibility for their buildings or their tenants. Of course, there are some good private landlords and letting agents—I know a number of them myself, including some in my constituency. However, the cases that are highlighted to me by constituents tend to be about things that are going wrong. That is often the fault of the private landlord, but sometimes it is the fault of the letting agent or the tenants. When we talk about the state of buildings, we must make reference to property factors, and some owners’ unwillingness or inability to fund repairs and maintenance of their buildings properly. I know that there has been legislation to improve factors’ behaviour. However, we also have perfectly good factors who want to maintain common property but struggle to get the owners, including private landlords, to pay their proper share. Compulsory factoring and sinking funds have been suggested. I have sympathy for that approach, but a problem is that some owners just do not have the money for the repairs that are required. It also strikes me that some tenants are more able and willing to complain than others. Housing association tenants are often well aware of their rights, and there are clear procedures for taking up issues, including regular contact with housing officers. However, people who rent in the private rented sector are often more vulnerable to start with and, if they are younger, they may be doubly disadvantaged. Although I joined the committee after the inquiry was carried out, it strikes me that there are key themes running through the report. First, we need a joined-up approach and, secondly, prevention is the key—as it is in many other areas that we debate. That point is highlighted in the sections on mediation and respite. The report also highlights the role of schools, both as a first point of contact in a crisis and in covering issues such as financial education. I know that more work is being done on that by credit unions these days, but I also accept that there is a danger that we expect the schools to do too much if we look to them to deal with every problem that we have. I note the point that financial education provision in schools can be patchy—for example, paragraph 33 states that “getting there was ‘pretty much dictated’ by whether headteachers viewed it as a priority”— but I think that we must also have some sympathy for school headteachers, who may face a range of priorities, depending on their area. When the Finance Committee studied employability issues, we also concentrated especially on young people. During our visit to Hawick, we heard about one housing association—whose name escapes me at the moment—which takes on some of the most challenging school pupils on work placements. That has a double advantage because it helps the young people to be more ready not only for employment but to be tenants. That seems to me to be a good example of a more holistic approach in which things are more joined up. More locally, I recently had a case involving a 16-year-old girl in secondary 5 who was doing well at school. However, she stayed with her grandmother and, unfortunately, the grandmother died. There were no other relatives who were able or willing to help the girl, so she was left with very little income and a house that was too big for her. From what I can see, the school has bent over backwards to help her, and the housing association has tried to find smaller, more suitable accommodation. I think that the school has even helped her financially, but surely that should not be the school’s responsibility. I hope that that situation works out well; it shows that we need a joined-up approach. Too often, things seem to depend on individual teachers or social workers going the extra mile beyond their job responsibility. On prevention, there is so much that can be said—some of it already has been. Tensions building up within a home can lead to a young person leaving and becoming homeless, so anything that we can do to reduce those tensions must be welcomed; the need for respite provision is mentioned in the report and has been mentioned by members today. Another option, I suggest, is to provide help to families so that they can get a holiday away together, where they can have time for reflection and be away from the normal pressures that the household faces. I recently led a debate on social tourism, which I think has a place in taking some pressure off families. It is also good that the report highlights isolation as an issue. It applies not just to young people; we saw a similar problem when residents of the big mental health facilities, such as Gartloch hospital in Glasgow, were suddenly moved into individual flats, where they felt very isolated. That was not the ideal situation for many of those folk; similarly, putting a young person in a flat on their own may not be ideal. I hate to think that anything good could come out of the current welfare reforms, but for some young people sharing the costs of a flat could be an advantage. In conclusion, if we learn one thing from the committee’s report, it should be that homelessness among young people is not just a housing issue or a social work issue, but is a challenge for a wide range of people, including ourselves, here. We all need to take on that responsibility.

Will the member take an intervention?

It seems that the electricity market reform policy overview of November 2012 correctly highlighted the three objectives as being to keep the lights on, to keep energy bills affordable and to decarbonise energy generation. Most of us have signed up to that, and it is encouraging that both the UK and Scottish Governments seem to be taking a reasonably joined-up approach, although there are still differences between them. The question is how are we to fulfil all those objectives and get the right balance between them. In addition, we need to look at the long term and not just the short term. That is the point on which I would like to speak first. Whatever form of energy and electricity we are to produce, there needs to be investment in the short term now in order to ensure long-term supplies. That includes investment in both generation and distribution. There was an article in today’s Herald headed “Grid pays £6m to turn off wind farm turbines”. Although the headline was slightly dramatic—perhaps not unusually, for The Herald—the article itself was more reasonable. The problem here is not so much the fact that wind energy is involved, but that the grid needs to be developed.

Yes, I read about that in the article. The next line of my speech says, in fact, that Longannet and Peterhead also received constraint payments. Politicians are accused at times of looking only to the short term, but the private sector can be equally guilty of that; an example is the insufficient past investment in oil-refining capacity around the world. One of the encouragements that we see at the present time is the huge investment in the North Sea, which reflects the long-term confidence in oil and gas there. The constitution has been mentioned this afternoon, but the issue has not been a major problem for those investors. The result of all this is that when we buy petrol at the pump or gas off the mains, part of the price is for the longer-term investment. That is true of almost anything that we buy, whether it is a loaf of bread or a pint of beer. Similarly, we need to take a long-term view of other sources of energy. That is especially true of new forms of energy, namely renewables. Nuclear power has been subsidised for a long time and clearly cannot be operated without a subsidy. My father worked for his whole life for South of Scotland Electricity Board, Scottish Power, or their predecessors. He was a fan of nuclear generation: I remember going on a family outing to visit Hunterston. However, the idea that electricity from nuclear would be virtually free—as I think he and his generation hoped for—is now seen to have been a pipe dream. It is also clear that coal, oil, gas and uranium are finite; one day they will run out. Even uranium resources are measured to last for only about 70 to 100 years. We want India, China and others to develop into modern economies. That means that they will need increasing amounts of electricity. We have a duty to this country and to future generations to produce more renewable energy to replace fossil fuels. I believe that we also have a duty to developing economies around the world to contribute our share to carbon reduction. That is why a key contribution that Scotland can make is through universities such as Strathclyde, which are respected worldwide and are responsible for bringing a considerable degree of investment to this country. I add that one of the reasons why we have high fuel prices is the weakness of the pound. Although exporters can be glad that the pound has devalued over the years—of course, now it is about 85p against the euro, when it was 70p for a long period—the downside is that anything we buy on world markets is more expensive. That certainly includes fuel. One could say that one of the failures of successive UK Governments is that policies have led to a devaluation of the pound. I believe that one of the big advantages of investing in renewables now is that it reduces our reliance on imports, so we will be less vulnerable to a weak pound in the future. I do not often get to speak on energy or on matters such as this, so I would like to range a little bit wider in my closing remarks. I was saying earlier that my father took me to Hunterston. I have another memory of being on holiday with him in the Highlands, when he would admire and point out to us the electricity cables sweeping through the glens. He was particularly pleased when the individual pylons did not interrupt the sweep of the cables. Some people would say that renewable energy means spoiling the landscape; but it is also said that beauty is in the eye of the beholder. My father found that the pylons could be beautiful, though I am not sure that I entirely agreed with him. However, I think that the wind turbines we have now look superb. They make the M74 much more interesting to drive down. On Easter Sunday, I walked the dog at Whitelee, near Eaglesham. It really is impressive; it is clearly a tourist attraction in its own right and draws both locals and folk from further afield. When we discuss the electricity market, we need to say that we should not be where we are now. I, for one, opposed privatisation in 1991 and did not buy any of the shares on sale at that time. It still seems ridiculous to me that the same electricity is coming out of the same wire, but we pay different companies for it. As far as I am concerned, it is an artificial market, but we are where we are. Clearly, I do not see nationalisation as a realistic option, given the other demands on our finances. I welcome the Government motion and I hope that we can work together with the UK and other European neighbours. I urge that we take a long-term view and encourage investment for the future.

I very much agree with what the member says about 16 and 17-year-olds. However, I have been in some schools where young people have said that they do not have a lot of confidence that they understand all the issues. How would the member respond to such young people?

Will the member give way?

The member paints an encouraging picture of the north-east. Does he think that schools in other parts of Scotland should do more to point young people towards engineering and such jobs?

One or two members suggested that I should move my seat because I was sitting in the sunshine, but—surprise, surprise—it has gone. We are talking about tourism; more specifically, we are talking about social tourism. I thank the Presiding Officer and members across the chamber for their support in obtaining the debate. Social tourism is one of those subjects that many of us did not know much about. I first had contact with John McDonald and the Family Holiday Association when I was at Westminster, and the more familiar I have become with the whole idea of social tourism, the more enthusiastic I have become about it. The key point for me is that people on low incomes should and need to be able to have holidays. The secondary but still important point is that social tourism can be a boost to our tourism sector. Other members may focus more on the second point, but I would like to concentrate on the first. I suppose that the first issue that we would expect to come up on the topic is the belief that a holiday is surely a luxury, to which people on low incomes have no right. I very much want to challenge that assertion. I think that we now recognise that having a job does not guarantee a route out of poverty. Numerous studies, including the Finance Committee’s recent study on employability, have confirmed that people have a wide range of needs, which include physical and mental health needs, as well as a need for an income of a certain level. Many of us know how much we benefit from getting away for a week or two. It need not be hugely expensive or luxurious, but getting away from our normal environment, with all the pressures and routines that we are subject to, can set us up for re-entering the fray on our return. One of my preferences is camping in a tent. I find it tremendous to be away in the fresh air, when I can get more physical exercise without being under any pressure to get up at a particular time in the morning, which is the case even in bed-and-breakfast accommodation. I accept that living in a tent is not everybody’s cup of tea, but there are other ways of having a reasonably inexpensive break or holiday, or even just a weekend away, whether it be in caravans, holiday parks or guest houses, among other options. Given that stress affects us across the income spectrum and is a key factor in people’s health in poorer areas, I would argue that holidays and leisure activities are also necessary across the income spectrum and are not just a luxury available only to those on good incomes. Those points are supported by research, as members may have seen in the Family Holiday Association’s briefing. For example, the University of Nottingham has done a study that showed that 77 per cent of families were happy after a holiday, that 70 per cent were more optimistic and that 74 per cent had a more positive outlook on life. A study by the University of Westminster and the University of Surrey showed that families felt closer after a holiday and felt rejuvenated after a break from the stress and worries of their normal life. Members might say that we do not need academic research to tell us that, and I would largely agree. However, in a sense, that makes the point. It is pretty obvious that a break from the usual routine is a good thing, so, logically, we should make it happen as much as we can. The statistics that we have show that in the United Kingdom 2.5 million children are in families who cannot afford even a day trip to the seaside; I reckon that the proportionate figure for Scotland is about 200,000. Similarly, 3.5 million children do not get even a week away in a year; again, proportionately, that is about 280,000 in Scotland. One of the facts that shocked me when I took part in a conference in London on poverty was that there are kids in London who have never seen the Thames. We could have similar stories here about kids who perhaps have never seen a cow—that situation cannot be right. I know that Unison and other trade unions are supportive of the concept of social tourism. Unison’s website states: “But holidays don’t just have an impact on the individual, they also affect wider society. Employers and communities benefit too.” Unison and other trade unions have had their own holiday schemes, albeit often on a fairly small scale, but they are also under financial pressure these days and cannot do all that they would like to do. Social tourism is an area in which we can learn from other European countries that are very committed to it. For example, France has a voucher system through which employees can purchase vouchers at a subsidised price, with lower-wage staff getting a higher subsidy and higher-wage staff getting less of a subsidy. The vouchers are redeemable in hotels and restaurants throughout France. That is reckoned to help 7 million people to have a holiday or other break that they could not normally afford and, in addition, to pump €3 billion into the French economy. There are similar voucher schemes in Switzerland, Poland, Cyprus, Italy and Hungary. In Spain, there is a scheme that helps 1.2 million Spanish senior citizens. As well as the direct benefit to recipients, the scheme extends the holiday season in the tourist resorts and therefore stimulates economic activity. The Spanish Government invests about €125 million in the scheme, and it reckons that for every €1 invested, it gets €1.5 in extra tax revenue in return. My personal experience locally is of the Family Holiday Association, a charity that has provided a fund for the two local schools in Barlanark in my constituency. The fund has been able to support individual families or groups of families who were under pressure and needed a break. I am delighted that in the public gallery we have from Sandaig primary the head and deputy head, Moira McArthur and Linda Burke. Members who came to the drop-in session might have met Linda Burke, who told some of us that they have a school trip coming up within the next couple of weeks and that, for some of the children at the primary school, it will be the first time that they have seen the sea and played on a beach. I find that quite moving. So, what was my aim in bringing today’s debate? First, it was to raise awareness of the topic of social tourism. It is clear from speaking to other members—I believe that this is also true of Westminster members—that they are not hugely familiar with the term “social tourism” and what it means. Although little bits and pieces have been happening on it here and there, there has not been the bigger, joined-up approach that has happened in other countries. I hope that this debate is a small step towards a longer-term agenda of increasing familiarity with the subject. I hesitate to suggest that we start another cross-party group, as members generally feel that we have enough of them—although the possibility has been suggested to me—but I am interested to hear from the Government and from members speaking on behalf of other parties how they view social tourism and the benefits to individuals and the tourism industry in this country and whether we are open to developing it as a concept in Scotland. I do not believe that we need to spend a lot of money to make social tourism work. Perhaps it is more a matter of using the resources that we already have, such as the empty hotel bedrooms, in a more joined-up way.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member accept that, if the overall indication is that the effect will be broadly neutral, the room for manoeuvre is not huge? The position is not that unpredictable.

It is encouraging that there is widespread welcome for the replacement of SDLT with a simpler and more progressive tax, and especially for the replacement of the slab system, in which a huge increase in tax could come from a tiny increase in price. The committee as a whole was very positive about the bill and the tax, with the clear conclusion that it supports the bill’s principles. It was mainly around the edges that we had questions or suggestions for improvements. My first main point is to say how exciting it is that we are having this debate at all, because we are debating the introduction of the first new tax in Scotland. Okay, it is only a small tax, but there is something symbolic about it: it shows that the country and the Parliament are moving forward to maturity. Not only are we spending a block grant that has been given to us, but we are becoming involved in raising some of the revenues that we can spend. That will be challenging, not least for the Finance Committee, which will have to gain the expertise and find the time to examine properly and challenge the new tax as it is put into effect. As I said, the tax is relatively small, and there are bigger taxes to come—especially the share of income tax—but it is the first step on the latest stage of the constitutional journey. It is one step closer to fiscal autonomy and one step closer to independence. It seems to be inevitable that we will eventually reach independence; the only real question is when exactly that will take place.

That question is not quite on subject. Given that Calman proposed a system of block grant reduction that would have damaged Scotland, I have to say that I am not a fan. I return to the tax itself. How we implement it will set a precedent for future taxes. The cabinet secretary referred to the principles of getting it right at this stage. I am very comfortable with the four principles that he mentioned when he quoted Adam Smith: certainty, taxpayer convenience, efficiency and proportionality in relation to ability to pay. We spent a lot of time looking at reliefs and it was interesting that some of the same people who asked for simplification of the tax also seemed to ask for more and more reliefs. In fact, some of the witness who appeared did not really want to pay any tax at all. I would like to spend a moment on that point. The suggestion is that we must be competitive and so we must lower all taxes, but that is far too simplistic a view. Tax is surely one factor when companies come to make decisions about location, but an educated workforce is another, and we cannot have an educated workforce if we do not have taxation to fund schools, colleges and so on. Tax is inherently a good thing; it is how we fund public services, but of course we accept that it has to be at a reasonable level. I will comment briefly on some of the reliefs that we discussed. On sub-sale relief, there was initially quite a lot of confusion among members of the committee and some of the witnesses about funding mechanisms. The example that was given of a farm that is bought and then split among three neighbouring farmers seemed to be a good one. Zero-carbon homes relief has not worked under SDLT. We took evidence from a number of witnesses who were enthusiastic about it, but it seems to me that such a relief under LBTT would be a very blunt instrument to use to achieve what is a good aim. On charities, we are looking for a practical solution. It is clear that OSCR has set the bar for qualifying as a charity very high, and we do not want to compromise that by allowing any charity anywhere to count as a charity here. We discussed tax avoidance at length. The Scottish Parliament information centre briefing on the bill says: “Tax avoidance is distinct from tax evasion in that avoidance exploits loopholes in the law, while evasion entails illegal activity.” It has traditionally been held that avoidance includes moral avoidance—an example of which is people claiming their tax allowance—and immoral avoidance, which involves going against the spirit of the legislation. It seems that the more reliefs there are, the more doors there are for avoidance and the more avoidance there is likely to be. I know that that will be dealt with in the proposed tax management bill, which will include a general anti-avoidance rule. We spent less time on exemptions. In general, it is assumed that the exemptions will be much as they are at present. I have some questions about exemption on death, as it could maintain the gap between rich and poor by allowing wealth to stay in richer families. However, I take the point that inheritance tax is intended to address that. The issue of rates and when they should be announced came up. In paragraph 10 of its report, the committee welcomed the progressive structure that is being adopted. It has been said a number of times that some people would like the rates to be announced sooner rather than later, but how can the cabinet secretary make future budget announcements so far ahead? That would tie his hands. We do not know what house prices will be like or what the situation will be in the wider economy, let alone what will happen with the block grant and the related adjustments. It has been indicated that LBTT will be broadly revenue neutral, which I guess gives a pretty strong indication of what level the rates are likely to be set at. The relationship with HMRC is crucial for all three taxes. So far, it seems that if we make changes that affect Scotland, we must pay the bill, but if Westminster makes such changes, we still have to pay the bill. I do not think that that was the original intention. I am somewhat suspicious of HMRC, but I hope that I will be proved wrong. I am more than happy to support the bill and the tax that it will introduce. I am especially happy that it marks the first step in the next stage of our journey as a country.

Hear, hear.

The member mentioned corporation tax. Would he not like us to have control of that?

Does the member have an alternative suggestion for where the money should come from? Should it come from the health budget?

The comments I make will focus mainly on finance. I accept that some people—perhaps some people in the legal profession and perhaps even some members—would say that we must have a perfect legal system no matter what it costs, that there should be courts in every village and that the courts should be able to take as long as they like to make decisions because, after all, justice matters more than money. Although I accept that such a debate should not be just about money, I believe that it can neither be without reference to money. Of course we want the courts to be as local as possible and to respect the historical importance of certain areas, but all our budgets are under pressure from cuts—for example, the capital budget has been cut by 26 per cent—so, on the face of it, every budget needs to be cut. That is the starting point not only for the Government but for the Parliament as a whole. I find it deeply insulting that Iain Gray refers to my profession and civil servants as bean counters, as if we are some kind of second-rate citizens because we count up the money. He should perhaps remember that his Government forgot to count up the money and got the country into the mess that it is in. The proposals would save some £1 million per year in running costs and £3 million in maintenance costs. That seems fairly positive to me.

I understand the point that Iain Gray made, but I did not hear the point that we must live within our means. The Opposition parties must think about that and get to grips with the fact that, if they want more money to be spent in one area, they have to suggest what other area would get less money. My constituents must live within their means, especially now that the bedroom tax and all this ridiculous stuff means that money is being taken off them, and the Government and Parliament need to live within their means as well.

Alison McInnes makes the right point: she makes the point that it is about choices. If we can get people living on canals, I am totally supportive of that. Christine Grahame also said that we must make a choice, as I understood it, between legal aid and buildings, and I would support choosing legal aid over and against buildings. I was disappointed that neither Alison McInnes nor Margaret Mitchell managed to give us any other suggestions for where the money might come from.

I did hear some of that. That is a slightly strange idea, especially from a party that is cutting the budget for the whole country. In my constituency, ordinary people have to live within their means, and the Parliament and Government must live within their means. In the course of the budget process, the Finance Committee heard lots of ideas about how to spend more money, and we have heard that again today. There are lots of good ideas, but we do not really know where we will get the money from. We should hear more about where the money is to come from. If it is to be a matter of cutting funding for colleges, health or local government, the Opposition parties need to be a bit more straightforward about that. To give the Greens their due, they tend to be a little more straightforward in that regard. For courts and justice, the starting point is that we need to make cuts. If that is not to be done in the way that is proposed today, we need to hear suggestions from the other parties about where the money is to come from, either within the justice budget or from other departments. For example, does Labour think that we should cut college or health budgets and put more into justice? I have not heard that today.

No, we have had quite enough interventions. We have become a less localised society. We travel more to bigger schools, shops and cinemas. In many ways, that is not always a good thing. We have previously debated in the chamber the value of local organisations, local food production, local colleges, local shops and local leisure centres—all things that we like. However, we are where we are, and the centres of population are not where they used to be. The justice system and the courts cannot stand apart from shifts in society. As an accountant, I have seen how annual accounts and audits have had to shift with the times and in response to modern demands. Annual accounts and audits often have to be finished within days of a year-end. I am not saying that that is always good—there needs to be time for reflection—but I sometimes get the impression that the legal profession has not been so keen on updating itself and on working more efficiently and to timescales that fit with the modern world.

4. To ask the First Minister what assessment the Scottish Government has made of Scotland’s public finances. (S4F-01311)

I thank the First Minister for that answer. Yesterday’s figures also showed that Scotland has higher employment and lower unemployment than the rest of the UK. Does he agree that the misguided economic policies of the UK Government are the greatest threat to that progress, and that having the fiscal levers of independence would allow us to build further on it?

I did not realise that we were going to cover local alcohol products in addition to the contribution that is made by butchers, but it is good to do so. Does Nigel Don share my disappointment that when people come to receptions in Parliament—whether at lunchtime or in the evening—they do not get Scottish wine or beer?

We sometimes hear criticism of the EU, for a variety of reasons. Will the member confirm what I think that he just said, which is that the EU gives Scottish companies the opportunity to compete on a level playing field?

Will Elaine Murray give way on that point?

Does Mary Scanlon accept that one reason why we have limited resources is that we have tied up funds in private finance initiative projects, which have ended up being far too expensive for what we get?

Thank you for that reassurance, Presiding Officer. I welcome the fact that procurement is on the agenda. Although we all accept that there is definitely room for improvement, we can also accept that progress has been made in recent years. For example, there has been an increase in the number of contracts being won by small businesses: 82 per cent of winning businesses were SMEs, and 68 per cent, which is up 12 per cent from 2010, were Scottish SMEs. I take Elaine Murray’s point that the definition of an SME can be quite wide. That is correct and we need to help some of those microbusinesses as well. By contrast, the United Kingdom has not been doing so well, and is lagging behind the Netherlands, Germany and France in terms of procurement from the SME sector. Once again, we see that the UK has proved that it is being less than successful. Of course, as has already been mentioned, the European Union is a factor in all that and we can expect some of the anti-Europe brigade to start complaining. However, we should remember that the EU aims for a level playing field and a small country such as Scotland stands to gain more than we would lose by our companies exporting more and working more overseas. Again, as already has been mentioned, Jim and Margaret Cuthbert came to the Finance Committee and talked about how other countries are often better at breaking down contracts into smaller and more manageable pieces for social enterprises and SMEs. Perhaps there is scope for us to learn from some of our EU friends. The concept of best value is good and I suspect that others will mention it. In my experience, best value meant that we were allowed to look at more considerations than just the price than we were when using the previous way, in which we looked only at the price. I note the reservations of Oxfam and the SCVO that there might be a tendency to slip back to looking only at the price; that is not a fair definition of best value and it is not what it is meant to do. As a councillor in Glasgow City Council, on a number of occasions I saw awards being made for contracts that were not at the lowest price. As opposition members, we questioned that, but there was often a good explanation as to why. We really wanted quality and that outweighed any saving, as is absolutely right. Perhaps Oxfam is slightly naive if it thinks that we can forget about money and price altogether; we need to strike a balance. The SCVO is right to say that £9 billion is not just a honey pot for business. If a construction company that is building for the public sector is different from a construction company that is building for Morrisons or Tesco or any other supermarket, we should expect higher standards in all sorts of ways, and for there to be a benefit to the wider local community. Of course, we do not want to chase such organisations away. Again, when I was a Glasgow councillor I saw that, in many cases, Glasgow was competing with Lanarkshire and if the city imposed too many onerous conditions, businesses would go to another local authority. As the cabinet secretary said in her speech, balance is needed. It must be advantageous to do business in Scotland, but when we look at the current balance, we sometimes feel that there is too much benefit to the private sector and not enough to the community. We had a very good briefing from the Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund, which quotes from the Scottish Government’s 2009 sustainable procurement action plan, which says that procurement is “A process whereby organisations meet their needs for goods, services, works and utilities in a way that achieves value for money on a whole life basis and generates benefits not only to the organisation, but also to society, the economy and the environment”. SCIAF also makes the point that ethically traded goods and services need not cost more and might provide better value for money. It referred to the European Court of Justice’s confirmation in 2012 that fair-trade criteria can be used in public procurement requests as long as the request refers to the criteria underlying the label and not to the label itself. It strikes me that there is something fundamentally wrong in our enforcing a minimum wage on producers in this country but not in respect of imports from elsewhere. That is not to say that a minimum wage level should be the same in every country around the world, but it should be appropriate for costs in that particular country. That is fundamentally what fair trade is all about. Oxfam also referred to inequality in Scotland, the UK and overseas, and the socioeconomic duty, which is one of the characteristics of the Equality Act 2010. I want to mention one or two examples in which there is room for improvement. A little two-person business in my constituency that made rubber stamps—the kind that are still quite widely used on paper—lost out on its contract to supply the local school because a big national contract came in. Another local business that I visited wrote to me to say: “We carry out ... work on a regular basis with the NHS, Scottish Prison service, Clydesdale Bank, Mecca Bingo, to name a few but we don’t get an opportunity to cost any ... contracts whatsoever with Glasgow City Council. We have tried tirelessly to get on their Supplier list with no success and no feedback as to why we have been unsuccessful.” In advice services the other year, Citizens Advice Scotland and others were competing throughout Glasgow, which was a big mistake. Finally, as Patrick Harvie has said in the past, here at Holyrood we are drinking foreign wine when we could be drinking Scottish beer.

The cabinet secretary might be aware that RBS is planning to close a branch in Shettleston, in my constituency, which will leave only one RBS branch for 70,000 people. Does the minister share my frustration that a publicly owned company should be treating the public with such contempt?

As far as I can see, there has been a pretty widespread welcome for the majority of the reforms that are laid out in the bill. It is clear that the universities and the colleges are hugely important to Scotland and our people, especially our young people. The main points of the bill are to do with governance and organisation. I am particularly interested in the colleges, as they play a key role in the east end of Glasgow and other needy parts of the country, especially among those who are most marginalised. Of course, the universities are important, too, and many of us have benefited from free university education—in my case, at the University of Glasgow. There is a balance to be struck between universities and colleges. There is also a balance to be struck between making cost savings and avoiding duplication, which larger organisations can often do, and keeping close to neighbourhoods and having close-knit community involvement, which smaller organisations can do. When I moved to Barlanark in the early 1990s, John Wheatley College did not have a great name, and local students would often travel further afield to attend an institution with a stronger reputation. That situation has changed dramatically, and John Wheatley College now has a very good reputation in the city and beyond. In particular, it has a strong reputation for engaging with the local community and drawing in people who might otherwise be cast adrift by society. As a result, I was concerned when I first heard of this idea of mergers and regionalisation. Would it mean weaker links with local communities? That issue is touched on in paragraph 124 of the committee’s stage 1 report. Moreover, given that the universities were all over the papers with poor governance issues, why was it the colleges that were being reorganised? I have to say that my concerns have been allayed to some degree. The three colleges in my area—John Wheatley, North Glasgow and Stow—have thrown themselves into merger talks with some enthusiasm and I believe that the story is similar in the south and west of Glasgow with Langside, Cardonald and Anniesland colleges. The merger consultation document, which is out for comment, very much emphasises the opportunities.

If the member will be brief, yes.

There is some doubt about the cutting of courses—some courses have been renamed and new courses that have been introduced have not been taken into account—but I will leave that for others to deal with in a bit more detail. Before that intervention, I was going to quote from the merger consultation document from John Wheatley, North Glasgow and Stow colleges, which states: “The scale of the social and economic challenges we face in this part of Glasgow is different; New College is designed to meet them. Building on our past, but looking to the future, our merger offers the potential for a college that is distinctive and special. This proposal sets out how we shall make that happen.” If members allow, I will dwell on the Glasgow situation a little bit more. We are heading towards a region with three assigned colleges, two of which will have multiple campuses away from the city centre, including in some of our most challenging areas. The other—the City of Glasgow College—is in the city centre and draws not only from all over and beyond Glasgow but internationally. The colleges appear to be quite different animals and I am glad that, in Glasgow, there will be a regional approach with three distinct colleges. It will be a challenge for the regional board to balance the different requirements and to avoid one part dominating the others. I am glad that the Education and Culture Committee has examined the issue in paragraphs 133 to 144 of its report, and I especially agree with its recommendation in paragraph 141. I hope that in practice there will be not only a good working relationship between the colleges but a fair degree of autonomy and subsidiarity. For example, John Wheatley College currently has two campuses, one in Easterhouse and the other in Haghill, to encourage as many students as possible to participate; even more locally, classes are run in the community itself. Some folk already travel from, say, the east end of the city to specialist courses in Clydebank or Motherwell, but doing that incurs travel and childcare costs. Indeed, that very issue is touched on in the Unison submission that members received for today’s debate; I did not agree with all of the union’s comments, but it made good points both on this matter and on the problem of territorialism. I am not saying that we should accept the issue in the longer term in Glasgow, and I acknowledge that good work is being done to tackle it. However, if we want to engage as many people as possible and draw in those who are furthest from employment, we need to make college provision as local as we can. We need to strike a balance, but I am not saying that that will be easy. Overall, I believe that the bill brings about a major change in the organisation of our universities and especially our colleges. I note the openness to amendments at stage 2 and look forward to seeing them.

Does the member agree, though, that it is better to have three separate colleges in Glasgow rather than pile them all into one?

4. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the 2013 United Kingdom budget. (S4F-01274)

How does the First Minister react to the chancellor and the Office for Budget Responsibility’s idea that the oil that we have in the North Sea is not really worth very much these days?

Will the member take an intervention?

In the interests of clarity, given that the member is demanding to know what somebody else would have as the corporation tax rate in an independent Scotland, what would the Conservative policy be for corporation tax in an independent Scotland?

I take Malcolm Chisholm’s point that it would be a challenge if we start afresh, but does he not think that his argument is somewhat weakened by the fact that the UK has already lost its AAA rating? Losing that rating was a fear for Scotland.

We have heard today that Scotland it is in a much stronger position than the UK. We have heard that, for a 8.4 per cent of the population, we contribute 9.9 per cent of the revenues and get 9.3 per cent of the expenditure. At the point of independence, of course Scotland starts at the same low point as the UK. However, the point is that we can climb out of the pit faster. No one is saying that we are immediately in surplus, but we have heard figures today showing that Scotland is relatively better off than the UK by £4.4 billion. We could reduce the debt by £1.4 billion, which I think deals with what Iain Gray was saying, and we could invest in housing or whatever. Is it really the Opposition’s contention today that it is better for Scotland to stay poorer and subsidise the UK? When we are out in the street, some people say to us, “Better the devil you know than the devil you don’t.” I therefore want to spend a little bit of time looking more closely at the UK, the devil we know. In the past, we were told that if we voted for devolution or independence, we would lose Linwood and the steel industry. In fact, we have lost both: the UK lost us our steel industry and our car manufacturing. Similarly, we were told that an independent Scotland might lose its AAA credit rating. What has happened? We have lost the AAA credit rating. Who lost it? The UK. Surely, it is clear that the UK is a failure. London politicians may look down on Greece and Cyprus, but the reality is that we are not far away from them. On a list of countries by gross government debt as a percentage of GDP, Japan—unsurprisingly—is first and Greece is second. However, Cyprus is only 33rd and the UK is 20th. Debt is not wholly bad, especially if it is used for capital investment with a long-term benefit, so I would support short-term borrowing.

That is why the UK lost its AAA rating. Investors around the world are losing confidence in the UK; I lost it before them. As I say, borrowing is not necessarily an entirely bad thing, but one of the marks of the UK’s failure is how out of control debt has become. Willie Rennie talked about debt being critical. According to yesterday’s BBC headlines following the budget, borrowing will be £114 billion this year and is set to fall to £108 billion, £97 billion and £87 billion in the following years.

Nobody is saying that the £4.4 billion is a surplus; it is a relative surplus. It is a smaller deficit than the UK’s. I have said that we start in the same pit as the UK and we get out of it quicker. Some people looking at the BBC figures that I have mentioned might think that that is the total borrowing and that the figures are horrific. However, those figures are only the UK’s new borrowing. The UK is borrowing huge amounts of money every year. Borrowing as a share of GDP is due to fall from 7.4 per cent in 2013-14 to 5 per cent in 2015-16. However, those figures relate to the new borrowing. Debt as a share of GDP total debt is set to increase from 75.9 to 85.1 per cent in 2015-16. That is failure. If we look at the total figures, it is scary. The UK’s borrowing is £1,111 billion at December 2012, which is approximately £18,000 per head of population. Over the next year, the figure will increase by £114 billion, which is about an extra £1,900 per head. Those are only the amounts that the UK Government owes. When mortgages and unsecured personal loans are included, the figure is about £40,000 per head of population. When we consider those figures, can we say that the UK has been a success story? I do not think so. Before the euro, people used to joke about countries such as Italy and Greece and how they devalued their currencies because of the economic mess that they were in. Exchange rates slipped and slipped again. However, that is exactly where the UK is now. When the euro was introduced, it was worth about 70p. The pound fell and it became about 80p for a while. Currently, it is worth 85p. Of course, there are good things in the UK, as there have been over the past 300 years that we have been living together. However, let us not look at the UK with rose-tinted spectacles or have our hearts rule our heads; rather, let us look at the UK realistically and deal with the facts. The Labour amendment mentions housing and colleges, which Margaret McDougall talked about. However, her speech was an argument for independence. Let us think about why there is not enough money for housing and colleges. Of course, we could cut another area, such as health, which is what I assume she wants to do in order to put more money into colleges. However, that would merely rearrange our limited resources. The key reason why we do not have more money for colleges and housing is that the UK and its economy have failed, Scotland is suffering the consequences of that. There are many other scare stories about Scotland not being able to afford the UK’s welfare system. However, we now have the bedroom tax and welfare cuts. The UK has failed on welfare and it is dragging us down with it. Do we want a race to the bottom on welfare for our children and our grandchildren? Last Friday, there was a guy at my surgery who was well dressed and presented and who had worked for most of his life. However, he had not eaten properly since the previous Tuesday and he was hungry. Is that a success? The UK has failed.

I think that the point about integrity was that there was deliberate hiding of the oil figures back in the 1970s. Does Gavin Brown accept that that is what happened at Westminster?

Does the cabinet secretary accept that many of my constituents want a stronger level of policing around football matches? They are fed up with their driveways being obstructed, with alcohol being drunk in the streets and with people urinating in public.

Will the member give way?

Is Jenny Marra arguing that more resources should be put into health and taken away from some other sector of the Scottish budget?

I greatly admire the cabinet secretary for attending an operation. I would not have dared to go in—the first time I gave blood as a student, they had to take me home afterwards. I am delighted to speak in today’s health debate. Members will not be surprised that I come at this from something of a finance angle. I do not often speak on health and I am therefore particularly glad to be talking about this today. In most debates, it is good to be positive, if we can be, and I would like to start with some positive points. It is clear that the Scottish Government is continuing to emphasise expenditure on health, and that is evident in the coming year’s budget. The Finance Committee has heard from some people who think that it is too focused on health and that we could put more resources into other things. However, I congratulate the Government on putting that emphasis on health, and I support its decision to focus resources on it. Waiting time figures are positive. We have heard a lot of figures this afternoon, but it is useful to compare the situation with the one that we were in 10 years ago, when 6,494 patients were waiting longer than nine months. In December 2012, only 395 patients were waiting longer than 18 weeks. That sounds like improvement to me. Patient satisfaction is another key indicator, and 88 per cent of patients are satisfied or very satisfied. However, there is always going to be room for improvement. Everybody accepts that. Nicola Sturgeon, Alex Neil and Alex Salmond have all accepted that. I have to say that some of the wording in the Labour motion is quite poor and perhaps even contradictory. One phrase that it uses is: “put patients and hard-working NHS staff first”. Presumably that is what targets are intended to do: they are supposed to ensure that people get the very best treatment they can. I wonder what exactly Labour is suggesting should be done to put patients and NHS staff first. I have listened to a number of speeches today and have heard a lot of description of problems and of individual cases, but I have not heard much about what Labour would do to put the situation right or improve it—for example, by putting in more resources. If it intends to put patients and NHS staff first, does that mean that education and schools will be put down the list and given fewer resources? If that is the case, I would not be comfortable with that. In one sense, targets put pressure on staff to deliver for patients. Is Labour suggesting that there should be less pressure on staff, even though the patients would suffer because of that. Again, I would have major problems with that approach. A phrase at the end of the Labour motion is “best possible patient care”. What does that mean? The best care in the world for every problem, no matter what the cost is? That is surely impossible. All our services have to live within their budgets. I agree that we want to provide the best possible care we can, within the budget. However, if the request is for more funding for health, we have to be told where that funding is to come from. Jackie Baillie said that we need more nurses. Where would she take the required resources from? Teachers? Colleges? When I intervened on Jenny Marra, she refused to say whether she wanted more resources for health or not. That happened again and again during the budget process. Many people came to the Finance Committee and the finance secretary saying, “We want more resources for our little part of the world”—each of which is important—“but we cannot tell you where that money should come from.”

That is interesting, as that would mean that there would be a centralised system, which is an issue that I wanted to deal with in my speech. That is something that I would also be wary of. We should be wary of making all sorts of comparisons. I think that we make too many with our nearest neighbour, England, and with the United States and so on. However, comparisons between health boards are interesting. If we believe in pushing down decision making to the lowest level, there needs to be an acceptance that there will be differences in the local provision. The word “lottery” gets used in this regard, but that is a wrong use of the word, because it suggests chance, and what we are talking about is local decision making. For example, in Glasgow we do not have exactly the same problems as people face in Edinburgh or Aberdeen. Quite frankly, I do not want the health decisions for Glasgow made in Edinburgh or Aberdeen, if that is what Jackie Baillie is suggesting. Although the NHS is there to serve patients, which is potentially all of us, we also need to be realistic about what we expect from staff. Of course figures should not be fiddled, no matter what, and staff should be able to challenge colleagues if fiddling is suggested—or happening, as I think Murdo Fraser suggested. Finally, I just want to say how committed our party is to keeping health in the public sector. In yesterday’s debate on demographic change, one Labour member suggested that those who can afford to pay should do so. I do not find it acceptable that, when people turn up at A and E or go to their GP, they should be asked for their credit card or be means tested. As far as I am concerned, we are committed to the NHS being free at the point of delivery. This is a dividing line between our party and Labour members: they are willing to roll back the NHS, whereas we will fight for the national health service. We may not always be successful in that fight and we will not always be able to afford all that we want to do, but we will fight for the NHS.

I note that the cabinet secretary mentioned the Highland region. I think that we all accept that it is an extremely good example. Does he have any suggestions for how we can roll out good examples across the country?

In defence of economics, would Sandra White accept that the fact that older people are living longer can provide an economic benefit and boost, through, for example, those people continuing to work for longer?

Will the member give way?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am greatly pleased to close the debate. I thank all members across the chamber who have been positive about the report. I am sure that the committee and the clerks are pleased about that. The convener gave a detailed overview of some of the key issues from the inquiry. I will touch later on some of the key points that members have raised on it during the debate. First, though, I believe that the committee welcomes the fact that people are living longer, to which a number of members have referred. Slightly tongue in cheek, I asked the cabinet secretary at committee whether the Government was positive about people living longer, which created slightly more laughter than I had expected. However, I think that the point has been made. John Swinney, Annabel Goldie and Malcolm Chisholm all referred to that. I quite liked the term that Annabel Goldie used, which was “demographic opportunities”. I do not think that I have heard that before, but I think that it is extremely good. Sometimes when we look at the media, everything just seems to be bad. For example, in June 2010, The Herald had the headline: “Glasgow has lowest life expectancy rate for men”, which is all doom and gloom. If we fast forward to March 2012, The Herald had the headline: “Ageing Scotland faces population time bomb”. It seems that no matter what happens, it is a bad thing. I want to touch on two issues on which the convener was not able to spend much time in his speech, namely data collection and sharing, and health conditions. In our call for evidence, we sought views on what data is and should be collected on the three core issues under consideration and what use is or should be made of that data to forecast funding needs. How data collection is shared and what use is made of it in the monitoring and evaluation process are issues that we have considered across our work programme this session, particularly in our work on early intervention and preventative spend. In our report, we highlight a number of issues around monitoring and evaluation. For example, with regard to the older people change fund, the Scottish Government has stated that it is “committed to establishing fit for purpose monitoring and evaluative processes underpinning what we recognise to be a very long term shift in spending patterns and culture in public services for Scotland.” We certainly welcome that commitment. We conclude our report by highlighting that “this Committee and its predecessor have consistently called for the need for more effective collaborative working across the public services including the need to pool resources and to share good practice.” That point has come out a number of times during the debate. We go on to say in our conclusion: “There is also a need to develop a more performance based and target based approach as a means of measuring the effectiveness of the various government strategies and policy initiatives which in turn should provide an increasing evidence base for accelerating the cultural and structural change which is essential if the challenges of demographic change and an ageing society are to be met.” That is a slightly longer sentence than I would normally use. However, that issue will be an area for discussion next week with COSLA. We also look forward to seeing what actions the Scottish Government will take to bring about such development. On health and social care, and in particular the health conditions that the convener flagged up earlier, we asked in our call for evidence: “To what extent are the pressures on health and social care a consequence of an ageing population as opposed to other health challenges such as obesity?” I think that Mr Carlaw referred to some of that area. We were interested in identifying, among other things, conditions that might become more prevalent or have a particular impact. Examples that came up were sight loss, conditions that relate to thinking skills, including dementia, and fragile fracture, which can have long-term and substantial cost implications for NHS boards and local authorities. A number of conditions that are likely to increase came up in evidence, and the report identified key challenges that health and social care services face in that regard. For example, NHS Education for Scotland said that NHS boards “can expect increased demand on psychological services” from older people, and Age Scotland said: “the cost of dementia to society is around £1.7 billion, which is projected to rise to £3.1 billion by 2031”. In a joint submission, Action on Hearing Loss Scotland and RNIB Scotland said: “By 2031, it is projected that the number of people with hearing loss in Scotland will rise from 850,000 to around 1.2 million. Similarly, the number of people with sight loss (without intervention beyond the current provision) is expected to double from around 180,000 to almost 400,000.” The submission went on to say that it is estimated that “sight loss conditions cost the NHS and the public sector in Scotland ... £194 million a year, plus £434 million more in terms of broader costs to the economy and to society ... This total cost is projected to rise by around £120 million a year”. The National Osteoporosis Society highlighted the long-term costs of osteoporosis and said: “250,000 people in Scotland currently have osteoporosis, a figure which is likely to rise as the average age of the population increases.” Those conditions emerged in evidence, but the list is not definitive. We look forward to hearing from the Scottish Government about the planning that it is doing to address the consequences of the increase in such conditions that is likely as a result of our having an ageing society. I am afraid that I will not be able to comment on all the points that were made in the debate. John Swinney mentioned the third sector. The evidence that the committee heard over a number of months suggests that although there is much support in the Parliament for the third sector, support can be patchy at local government level. We hope that that will improve. I very much appreciated the assurance that John Swinney gave when I intervened on him, in relation to the roll-out of good practice in the early years and elsewhere. I liked the phrase “sufficient pace”, which I think that John Swinney used a couple of times and which reflects some of the frustration that I think that all members feel. Members of the Finance Committee certainly thought that the move to join up the work of the NHS and social work services has not happened as fast as we would like. I also appreciated the assurance that demography will be a factor in future spending reviews. Ken Macintosh and other members referred to an excellent report—we are grateful for that. Ken Macintosh said that his area, East Renfrewshire, has among the longest healthy male life expectancy in the country. We heard personal stories, not least from Stewart Stevenson and Jackson Carlaw, which made me think about my experience. I live in east Glasgow, where, according to the table on page 8 of the report, healthy life expectancy for men is only 56. That gives me another two and a half months, which I have to say is quite sobering. I think that many members would agree that we cannot mention housing too often. Fiona McLeod said that appropriate housing can reduce the number of emergency admissions to hospital, and Malcolm Chisholm said that some houses cannot be adapted. It certainly came through to me in committee that we need to balance the need for adaptations, the need to make normal new housing as accessible as possible and the need to build new housing with a specific purpose, such as sheltered housing, in the private and public sectors. Willie Rennie made comparisons with other countries; that was useful, because we sometimes get a little too fixated on examining other parts of the UK, when there are other countries to consider. I agree broadly with what Sandra White said about economics, but I also think that the economic situation can improve as a result of people living longer—it is not an either/or situation. As the convener said, the committee aimed to take a rational and measured approach to its inquiry into an issue that will feature more prominently in the years to come, certainly for the Finance Committee, given our recommendation that “future Spending Reviews include an assessment of the impact of demographic change in each portfolio chapter.” I understand that when the report was published, the convener wrote to the conveners of the Health and Sport Committee, Local Government and Regeneration Committee and Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, given the relevance to their remits of the issues that we had covered. We look forward to seeing the Scottish Government’s response to our report’s conclusions. We can then all consider what short, medium and longer-term planning the Government and the Parliament will undertake. I support the motion in the name of the committee convener.

I thank Sarah Boyack for raising this subject and securing the debate. The briefing material that we have had from Oxfam, Tearfund, SCIAF and others has been impressive. There is a lot that we can say and there are a lot of figures that we could quote, which others are doing in the debate, but I will focus on two main points. First, we need fairer systems, including for trade and land ownership. Secondly, we need to increase overseas aid. In one sense that is one point, because I believe strongly that we need to do both things. On the one hand, some would argue that the need is so great today that the issue should be about immediate aid: giving people food. Just yesterday, I received an email from Tearfund, which asked for money for their appeal for Syria. There and elsewhere the need is present right now, not 10 years ahead. Some would argue that the longer term is a luxury that we cannot afford. On the other hand, others would say that short-term aid would just need to be repeated and is not worth while, so all the effort should be in long-term investment: changing the rules and changing land ownership. If I can make one point today, it is that we need to do both those things, not either/or, and I am glad that most of the briefings that we have received from different groups have covered that. I will make some points about a fairer trade system. At a time of economic pressure, such as the one we are in just now, for many in our society the need is to buy the cheapest product—the cheapest food and clothes—and perhaps not worry too much about where it came from. For some in our society, that has to be the case, and we do not criticise them for it. However, the reality is that many of us can and do make choices about what we buy, how much it costs and where it came from. The reality is that, if we take this country as a whole, we are a rich country. If we reallocated our own income and wealth more fairly in Scotland and the UK, many more people here would be able to pay a fair price for the goods that they buy. Within the system we need more transparency in company accounts, which is recognised as key. I am an accountant and I whole-heartedly support that concept. It has been estimated that developing countries lose something like £100 billion per annum from tax dodging, and I have seen higher figures than that. We used to think that it was only developing countries that were being fiddled out of their corporation tax as profits were moved away to western investors, but we now realise that the UK and Scotland are also losing out as multinationals move their profits around. For all those reasons, we need accounts that show the prices at which goods are crossing borders and hence the turnover and profit in each country in the supply chain, which at times, as we have been reminded, can be extremely long. Land ownership is key to all of this. Our own land ownership, which has been a problem in the past, has been updated but we probably need to go further. Even here, however, we have seen resistance from rich landowners to the reallocation of land ownership. I certainly do not advocate marching into other countries and changing their laws like some colonial power but we can work with and, I hope, support local groups that are seeking to improve land ownership. The Bible has an interesting concept that all land should revert to the original family every 50 years, but that might be a bit too radical for some. Finally, we need to give more overseas aid. It has often been said—indeed, we cannot say it often enough—that we should be meeting the 0.7 per cent target and trying to hit 1 per cent in due course. I believe that it is better to give as much of that aid as possible through the third sector rather than through Government; I certainly have more faith in many NGOs than I have in many Governments. To those who say that we should help those at home before we help those overseas, I say that we are a rich country and can do both.

I thank members who signed the motion, which has allowed the debate to happen. Perhaps I should start off by declaring a non-interest in the subject, in that I am happily single and do not have any children. The issue was highlighted for me in October 2011 when a young father in my constituency contacted me about the difficulties that he was having in seeing his son, who was 18 months old. I was impressed by the man. He held a responsible job and was obviously distraught at being pushed out of his son’s life. He told me that he had spent over £2,000 thus far on legal costs and expenses. He had been granted legal access to his son by the court, but the mother was still refusing access and the court seemed unwilling to enforce its decision. He also told me about an organisation called Families Need Fathers which, as I have got to know it, strikes me as a fairly balanced type of organisation, although we know that there are others in the same field whose members climb roofs and suchlike. I thank Families Need Fathers for its briefing for me and, I believe, other members. In March 2012, I attended one of the Families Need Fathers support meetings in Glasgow, which started at 7 pm with a collection of fathers telling their stories and expressing frustration or explaining problems, and getting support from others in a similar position. They were quite a mixed bunch of people from a variety of backgrounds, many of whom admitted making serious mistakes in their lives. However, I must say that I was totally captivated by the stories that they told, and I managed to get away only at about 11 pm. The motion for the debate was prompted by the publication last October of the Scottish Government’s “National Parenting Strategy: Making a positive difference to children and young people through parenting”. Alongside a lot of points on how good parenting can be supported, the strategy specifically mentions the importance of supporting and encouraging all fathers to play an active role in their children’s upbringing. The strategy mentions that fathers are sometimes forgotten when discussing parenting or are treated as if they are of secondary importance. It might be useful to mention a few statistics. The Scottish household survey indicates that about 21 per cent of households with children in Scotland are single-parent households and that 88 per cent of those one-parent families are headed up by the mother. That means that a substantial number of Scottish fathers live apart from their children; the figure is in the region of 150,000, although estimates are complicated. The results from the growing up in Scotland survey that was published recently indicate what is happening with the non-resident fathers: more than two thirds of them see their children at least once a week, but 9 per cent see their children once a month or less and 24 per cent do not see their children at all. That pattern tends to have developed by the time the children are 10 months old. Most of the non-resident fathers make some contribution towards their children through maintenance payments, but 13 per cent give no support of any kind. Of course, being involved as a father is not just about the amount of time or money that they spend; it also means being involved in important decisions about health, education and other matters regarding their children. The growing up in Scotland study indicates that many non-resident fathers are not given that opportunity. In a quarter of families where the non-resident father’s name was on the birth certificate, the father was not allowed any involvement in the key decisions for his child relating to inoculations or diet. It seems that a significant number of children are missing out on the involvement of their father. I can give members some examples of what such lack of involvement really means, which come from people who have taken their case to Families Need Fathers in Scotland. For example, a father who now has regular overnight care of his two young children after a long court battle is very concerned about one of his sons’ eating problems. The child’s mother refuses to discuss that with him and he has been told by the children’s health visitor that he cannot have information about what is being done to resolve the problem. Another father had a court order setting out times of contact with his son. Both the father and son were keen on football, and the father helped at the school’s football training. The boy’s mother took the court order to the school, showed it to the headteacher and indicated that the times listed on it were the only times when the father was permitted to see his son. The headteacher then told the father that he could help at football training only on the condition that his son was not there. Such issues can be sorted out if the relevant health and education authorities are clear about what the role of a separated father is; it should not be necessary for such battles to take place time and again. There seems to be a feeling at times by courts and some public authorities that if a father does not live with his children, he should be treated with suspicion until it is proved that he should be treated otherwise. Neither the Government nor the Parliament can legislate to make mothers and fathers get on with each other after separation, but perhaps we can act to remove some of the barriers that hold back fathers who want to play a part in their children’s lives. Some things should be fairly easy to do, such as reminding all schools of their obligation to treat separated parents equally and provide both mothers and fathers with school information. We must put the best interests of the children at the top of the agenda when parents are separating. The national parenting agreement provides a blueprint for parents to make such arrangements. Family lawyers in Scotland perhaps need to make more use of that as part of their service and make contact arrangements a priority from the outset, rather than a bargaining ploy to be spun out as long as possible. Sadly, an increasing number of cases are being heard in court. The annual number of legal aid supported applications for contact in Scottish courts has almost doubled over the past five years from 2,005 to 3,848. Perhaps more training and guidance for all sheriffs, and swifter action to identify and deal promptly with the very high-conflict cases would benefit affected children and their families. It would save money for all concerned, too. Some courts will make contact orders but not grant the accompanying parental rights and responsibilities, meaning that fathers have care of their children without the right to do things, such as authorise medical treatment. I welcome the progress that has been made in the Scottish parenting strategy but, clearly, changing long-held attitudes on the roles and responsibilities of mothers and fathers will not be easy. Article 9(3) of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child states: “Children whose parents do not live together have the right to stay in contact with both parents, unless this might hurt the child.” I ask the minister to respond on whether the forthcoming rights of children and young people bill will include a provision to ensure that right. Clearly, the situations that we are discussing are often difficult—I am sure that we will hear personal examples—but it is the best interests of the children that must be made the heart of the matter.

I think that most of us would agree that capital spending is an extremely good thing and that spending on housing in particular has many benefits beyond the building of houses. Such spending helps jobs, provides better-quality homes, less fuel poverty and better health and education opportunities. However, the reality is that we still have to work within certain constraints, not the least of which is the lack of available funds because of mistakes that have been made down south. We do not have the borrowing powers, but even if we did have them, we must require value for money. We still have to pay back the money that we borrow. We must be clear that the NPD model is different from the traditional funding model and causes extra complications. In the traditional model, funds can be moved around. If one project is going a bit slower, money can be moved to a project that can go a bit quicker. There have been examples of that in recent years. Money that was made available for the sleeper programme was temporarily moved into Scottish Water and switched back later. We do not have that flexibility with NPD. If a project is being held up and cannot move forward as quickly as we would like it to, that means that it will be slowed down and the funding cannot be switched elsewhere. However, we must remember that we want value for money. There is a temptation for some to say, “Well, we just want to spend money even if it’s not producing what we need.” A good example of that has been the Edinburgh to Glasgow rail improvement project. The plan was to increase capacity by increasing the number of coaches from four trains an hour with six coaches—that is, 24 coaches—to six trains an hour with six coaches, which would cost £1,000 million. However, the Jacobs report then showed us that for £650 million we could increase capacity to 32 coaches an hour—that is, four trains with eight coaches each. I understand that that is still being explored, but it is an example of how we should use money better. Spending £1,000 million is not always better than spending £650 million, if we spend the latter amount wisely. All the different funding methods must ultimately be paid for. Models such as PFI and PPP were so attractive because the borrowing did not appear on the balance sheet. However, it was still expensive borrowing, which has to be paid back. As has been said, one reason why we are suffering financially now is that we have to spend so much on PFI repayments. The Finance Committee has been looking at preventative spending, to which I think all parties are signed up. In that regard, we are looking at what we get out of the system rather than just the amount of money or effort that we put in. At a local level, I am positive about the Scottish Government’s investment in the east end of Glasgow, which I think everybody agrees is one of the needier parts of Scotland. In particular, there are projects around the Commonwealth games, some of which have already been completed, such as the Emirates arena, while others are being built—for example, Tollcross pool, the hockey centre and the games village, which of course will become social rented housing after the games. I very much welcome the recent announcement of £16 million through Clyde Gateway for a further office development on the Clyde, which will have the benefit of bringing more investment in to the area. In the past, we have seen many superficial improvements in Glasgow; we want real improvements now. I am delighted that the George Square plans have been dropped and I hope that something better will happen there. Westminster should have spent more to counteract the recession and I welcome the Scottish Government’s capital expenditure, whether through traditional funding or NPD. I urge the Government to stick to its guns and ensure that the money is spent properly and wisely.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Would the member, by his logic, also charge kids for being at school?

Having just heard a little about Edinburgh, members will not be surprised to know that they are going to hear a little about Glasgow now. I thank Margaret McCulloch for raising the issue of retail for debate. I certainly agree that retail is a key part of our economy. It is also appropriate to thank the Scottish Retail Consortium and the John Lewis Partnership for hosting a briefing event earlier this year, at which the minister spoke. I thought that it was a useful evening, with a lot of information and useful contacts from a wide range of backgrounds. Obviously, I am particularly interested in Glasgow, which is the largest retail area in the UK outside central London. In the city centre, we have both malls and stand-alone shops, and throughout the city we have major shopping centres, such as the Fort and the Forge in the east end. There are also town centres within the city, which we perhaps forget sometimes, such as Partick and Byres Road, and there are also more local shopping facilities. When we hear about new shops being opened in our areas, most of us are positive about it. Sometimes, we look below the surface at why a new shop is open and find that it is because there is increasing demand and consumption in the area, which is positive and will, we hope, attract more people to the village, town or city where the shop will be. On the other hand, it is not good if people are spending more and getting more into debt, as happened for a number of years, although I hope that that has reduced now. Margaret McCulloch referred to consumer confidence with regard to shops opening. My only word of caution about that would be that although confidence can be a good thing, if it is wise, it can also be a bad thing, if it is unwise. Another reason for shops opening is that they are replacing other shops, either in the same or other locations, which are then led to close. That may be good if it provides better choice, more convenience, better prices and so on. We have seen a trend, certainly over my lifetime, of supermarkets replacing smaller shops. However, I do not like the claim that some shops create jobs—okay, some jobs may be additional, but in many cases they are simply replacing jobs in smaller stores. We also see out-of-town developments replacing town centre developments and, within Glasgow, we see Buchanan Street and Ingram Street growing at the expense of Sauchiehall Street. I am grateful to Asda for its briefing for the debate. I have one of its major stores in my constituency. My impression of Asda and its community involvement is generally quite positive. I quite like the fact that it calls everybody colleagues rather than employees, although everybody will have their own view on that. Asda talks in its briefing about creating jobs across Scotland, which I feel is a little bit disingenuous when in fact it is the same money that is switching from other shops into Asda and presumably some of the same employees—or colleagues—who are moving from other shops. Perhaps that is just inevitable progress and the way life goes. I am old enough to remember the Glasgow bookshop John Smith, which had been around since Burns’s time—1751, in fact. That business was replaced by a Borders bookshop but, ironically, Borders has now been replaced by Amazon. I liked both the John Smith shop and the Borders shop. However, the temptation nowadays is to use online shopping. Because I am going away for a few days next week, I was looking for a guidebook. I knew exactly what I wanted and I knew that it cost £6.99, but when I looked on the Amazon website, I found that it would cost 1p, plus £2.80 for postage—it is difficult to argue with that. Retail is changing, but I want to finish on a positive note. I echo the point about getting a foot on the employment ladder. Asda provides an example of somebody who has gone from the bottom to the very top and who is now chief executive of that organisation. Perhaps schools need to do more to show young people that retail is a good career. I welcome the fact that we still have many small family businesses. Probably in every constituency, we still have good local butchers and bakers, although candlestick makers seem to be thin on the ground. Many shops sell Scottish produce, which I welcome. I remember that, when Morrisons came to Scotland, my mother could not get her Baxters soup any more, but I am glad to say that that is a thing of the past.

Will Ken Macintosh give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

For the member’s information, I was clapping for the extra £51 million next year.

I make the point that £270,000 of that was according to contract but £230,000 was extra, which is why the Labour councillors were guilty of misconduct.

Will the member give way?

I must admit to wondering whether or not parts of Alex Johnstone’s speech related to a parallel universe. I very much agree with the thrust of Kezia Dugdale’s motion for the Labour Party. Clearly, we are in a recession, there is austerity and people who are on low incomes—whether they are working or unable to find work—are struggling. We all recognise that debt, especially high-interest debt, is a problem. I welcome the fact that the subject has been raised, but I am slightly disappointed that time for the debate is so short. Debt consists of two overlapping problems: there is too much of it across society; and there is a specific problem for those who are struggling most to get by. It is clear that in the UK and in many other countries, Governments have borrowed far too much, but so have businesses and other organisations, as well as many individuals. Much of that borrowing has not been forced on them but has been through choice. I remember my father telling me about borrowing money for a car, which I guess was in the 1950s. His father was appalled that he could be so rash as to borrow against a car. However, borrowing has become a normal part of life for many of us, and saving has become little more than wishful thinking. I suggest that we need to change the mindset in society that borrowing is risk free and can be incurred without much thought. If someone has debts and their income falls, or if interest rates return to 15 per cent, as they were when I took out my first mortgage, they will have a problem. We must recognise that some people have no choice as to whether they have food or not, or put money in the electricity meter or not. That is the issue that we are concentrating on today. It is clear that debt is already a serious problem, but it is likely to get very much worse in the future, given that the welfare cuts will come in soon. If people have to borrow—one hopes only to tide them over in the short term—we need to ask how that can be done more safely. The motion makes some suggestions that should be supported. It proposes increased regulation of payday loan companies—and, I presume, of other lenders—and a cap on interest rates, but it must be said that both those areas are under Westminster control. When I was down at Westminster, there was little sign of the then Labour Government making much effort in that direction. The motion is a bit less specific about what demonstrating leadership means for central or local government, although Kezia Dugdale said a little more about that in her speech. It seems that anything that we can do here is very much around the edges; the real power lies down south.

Yes, despite the fact that Kezia Dugdale did not let me in for 10 minutes.

I have just mentioned two—

One of them was about advice, and I am just about to come on to credit unions. The provision of advice is part of the answer to the problem, and I welcome the money that the Scottish Government put into that sector recently. The people who struggle with debt and who deal with dubious moneylenders are often the people who are furthest from libraries, the internet and other sources of information. We need to encourage and support citizens advice bureaux and similar bodies. It would be preferable if they worked together in a network, which is why it was disappointing when Glasgow City Council had voluntary sector bodies competing against one another in its tender process the other year. Yesterday, I visited Govan Law Centre for the launch of a report on its prevention of homelessness project, which talks about prevention a great deal. I think that that is the answer. I will make three final points. First, January is a problem month. Is it still such a good idea to pay people their December pay before Christmas? Secondly, we need to encourage credit unions, but they have not yet taken off. Why is that? They have taken off in Ireland and Canada. Thirdly, the statutory minimum wage is far too low. We need to have a minimum wage that is a proper living wage.

Does Gavin Brown accept that although lots of people have suggested how we could spend extra money, not many people have suggested how we could spend the present money better?

Will the member give way?

Michael McMahon may remember that, at the Finance Committee, at least one party made the suggestion that, if we cut back on health, we could put more into economic growth. Does he think that health spending should be cut back to boost economic growth?

We all agree that it is disappointing that we are in this position, where we have so much that we would like to do in society but we do not have the resources to do it. This afternoon we have once again heard a lot of criticism but very few positive suggestions. The ideas on where the money might come from have included: efficiencies; savings; underspends; a review of IT; and fewer spin doctors. Those ideas are all really about tinkering around the edges. I have been there before, as those were the kinds of things that I used to say as a member of Glasgow City Council if I could not think of a better amendment for the council budget. Some of the other ideas, such as on the NPD programme, appear to be more serious. However, the point seems to have been missed that the funding for the NPD programme is ring fenced for particular projects. The fact that one project is postponed does not mean that the funding is available for another project, as we heard at the Finance Committee the other week. On the Edinburgh to Glasgow train links, the point again seems to have been missed that, if we can do something better than what was proposed and do it more cheaply, that is a better investment. The aim is not to spend money for the sake of it—

Let me just finish this point. We need to spend the money for the best. If we can get a longer train running between Edinburgh and Glasgow, that is a good opportunity, which I suggest will also be better for the environment. It could also be a cheaper option and a better option.

Mike Russell will have to answer on that for himself. He is adamant that there will be savings from mergers, although I think that everyone accepts that they will occur not in year 1 but later on. The City of Glasgow College is an example of that. The question, then, is not whether we would like more money to create more jobs—we can all answer yes to that—but whether there is another way to use the money that is available to create more jobs. Frankly, we have heard precious little about that this afternoon. To be fair, a few members have suggested options. The Equal Opportunities Committee and Patrick Harvie have questioned the move to construction, although for slightly different reasons, as the committee is concerned that it favours men rather than women. That is, at least, a real alternative. To give Gavin Brown his due, we accept that he is happy to cut universal benefits and use the money for other things. By contrast, we have not heard from Labour that it would cut universal benefits and use the money for other things.

Yes, but my point is that we would all like to spend money on those things. Nobody disagrees with the member that those are great things—absolutely, we should retrofit tenement flats in my constituency—but where is the money to come from? We must accept that we face tensions and choices. Since Parliament last met, I have twice been at events at the Lighthouse in Glasgow—on Friday and Monday. Patrick Harvie was the only other member who was at both events. On Friday, we considered women, economic policy and constitutional change. We talked about the tensions and what can be done about the widening gap between men and women when more money is being put into construction, although I am not sure that it is absolutely certain that that helps men. Yesterday, the Joseph Rowntree Foundation gave a presentation on poverty, at which we were asked what we would do in two years to cut poverty. That immediately creates a tension between the short term and the longer term. There are other tensions. Should we put more into housing and take money from other capital investment? If we are to put more into colleges, does that mean taking money away from universities? The Government has attempted to switch expenditure to a preventative approach. That way of thinking is welcomed by all parties, especially in committees, but we must accept that, if we are successful with preventative spending, it will probably mean fewer hospitals and prisons in the long run. We must all accept that we should not be defending hospitals or prisons if they are not needed, and yet the Opposition parties have a tendency to squeal when anything like that is suggested.

I have taken two interventions already, which I think is enough. From a Glasgow point of view, I welcome the investment in the Commonwealth games and the office development at the Clyde gateway, which aims to build up jobs in the east end. That is welcome. It is always possible to suggest improvements to the way in which any Government decides to spend its money, but the Government’s approach is in stark contrast to that of Glasgow City Council, which seems to be in a muddle these days. It was absolute madness to suggest spending £15 million on George Square when everyone else is tightening their belts. For the Labour councillors who run the Glasgow East Regeneration Agency, a charity that aims to help a needy area, to pay £500,000 to its chief executive is bordering on criminal.

We have not heard any better suggestions, so I am more than happy to support the budget.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

I speak in favour of amendment 10, which is an excellent move in the right direction. Originally, there was no mention of bringing new parties under FOI at this stage, but there clearly was a public appetite and a campaign to do that. I was particularly concerned about the likes of Glasgow City Council being able to chop bits of themselves off as arm’s-length bodies and thereby reduce the scope of FOI, so I was pleased that the cabinet secretary agreed to a specific date for a review. As has been mentioned, at stage 2 the Finance Committee questioned whether that date could be brought forward to before the next election. I am delighted that that will now happen and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s further commitment today.

Will the member just save time by admitting that he made a mistake with the transfer to GHA?

I certainly associate myself with Bob Doris’s comments and, at the right time, I absolutely want to see GHA covered by the legislation. Does Paul Martin agree that the Government has given considerable ground, and that the bill that we will pass today is considerably different from the initial proposal?

When we started considering the bill, a number of us identified two main problems with it—the first of which was the idea of a royal exemption. I think that the Finance Committee convener and Michael McMahon were especially concerned about that. The second problem was that no new bodies had been added to the list of bodies for FOI coverage, which I, among others, was concerned about. The Finance Committee report highlighted those issues, and I think that the report was considered to be fair. I commend the Government in general and Nicola Sturgeon in particular for listening to the committee and responding to those points. Specifically, the Government removed the royal exemption and agreed to consider additional organisations for FOI coverage. Originally, that was going to be done by June 2016, but as that date would be after the next parliamentary election, the date has been brought forward to October 2015. I accept that some people would like that date to be tomorrow and that others would like it to be yesterday, but there must be a certain amount of willingness to compromise, so the proposed date is acceptable. Those changes to the bill should not be underestimated. They have changed it from what I had considered to be a somewhat disappointing bill to a hugely improved one that is, as far as I am concerned, definitely acceptable. We should pay tribute to the Campaign for Freedom of Information in Scotland, whose briefings and evidence have been extremely helpful. My judgment is that it has achieved probably 75 per cent of what it set out to achieve for the bill. Of course, it wanted to achieve 100 per cent, but we can all be grateful to it for the strong case that it made in the bill’s progress through Parliament. The point has been made that if we were starting from scratch with brand-new FOI legislation, we might do things differently; in particular, such legislation might include a purpose section. I would certainly support such a section. I have supported such provision elsewhere—for example, for the bill that became the Equality Act 2010. I argued for a purpose section for the bill, but the Labour Party argued against it. However, in the case of this bill, we were amending existing legislation and not rewriting it, so I did not consider it appropriate to introduce major amendments that would, as the cabinet secretary said, have overlaid the bill rather than amended it. The point was also made that mindsets, as well as the legislation, need to change and that it is not just about the law, but about getting people to think differently. I agree. There is still the assumption in some quarters, and perhaps even in Parliament, that information should be confidential unless there is good reason for it to be otherwise. However, I argue the exact opposite: information should not be confidential, unless there is good reason for it to be otherwise, which is why removal of the royal exemption is so symbolic and significant. Of course, not many cases may be affected by that provision, but it is a clear statement from Parliament that there must be a reason for confidentiality of information and that it must not be just because the information refers to a monarch, a Government or an MSP.

A purpose section would have been an amendment on a specific point. A purpose section would overlay or underlay a bill, which would have changed the bill and the Equality Act 2010 (Amendment) Bill at Westminster. At the end of the day, we are debating how fast we should move on the bill’s provisions. I think that we all agree pretty well about the direction that we are going in, although some want to go faster while some, like Gavin Brown, want to go slower. However, I believe that the bill shows that we are moving forward.

I have spoken quite a lot this afternoon. Does James Kelly accept that the amendments that the Government has brought forward are significant and have changed the bill?

As members will be aware, the original focus of the motion was on the potential merger of BAE Systems and EADS. It is probably a good thing that that merger will no longer happen. It was an interesting case because the United Kingdom Government had a veto on the merger and the German Government was strongly opposed to it. However, as the motion states, the wider aim is to look at mergers and acquisitions policy as a whole and to consider whether we are best served by that policy. Investment is, of course, generally a good thing. It creates jobs and helps to grow the economy, whether we are investing in different parts of our own country or crossing borders into other countries. Whether or not Scotland is independent, we want to encourage foreign investment here and Scottish investment overseas. However, we do not want to repeat the mistakes of the past, when large grants were given to foreign firms without the same assistance being made available to local companies. In many cases, the foreign firms did not stay long and there was little benefit to the local economy. Napoleon called England—perhaps he meant Britain—“a nation of shopkeepers”. Of course, there is nothing wrong with being a shopkeeper, but if what he meant is that everything is available for a price if that price is right, that is a less positive statement. Over the years, we have seen railways, electricity and gas sold off to the private sector while other countries have kept those industries in the public sector. We have seen European companies, such as EDF Energy or German railways, take over some UK businesses. Is it fine if Scottish or British businesses are taken over by local or international competitors, or is there something wrong with the system, and do we need to improve it? We can all think of many Scottish companies that have been taken over, including Scottish Power. My father worked for that company all his life. It seemed a very successful company that moved from the public to the private sector. However, it was sold off to Iberdrola of Spain. Of course, it was a quoted company and the shareholders agreed to the sale, so, in one sense, that was that. I accept that Iberdrola has made considerable investments in Scotland and beyond since then so, on the surface, that seems to be a good thing. However, was it really good for everybody? Was it good for Scottish consumers, the employees or the related businesses, which lost another Scottish headquarters—the restaurants, hotels, airlines and lawyers that lost business? Was it even good for the shareholders in the longer term? Another, more recent example is the company that makes Irn-Bru—a successful company as far as most of us could see. It was situated in my constituency, although it moved out to Cumbernauld. Apparently, its legal HQ is to remain in Scotland but the operational HQ will be down south. The merger with Britvic is apparently to lead to 500 job losses, with Britvic being the larger partner and having some 63 per cent of the business. Despite the fact that the company that makes Irn-Bru may nominally be a leader in that merger, the fear is that the larger partner always tends to dominate in such matters. I think that it was Henry VIII who pointed out that, when there was a marriage between the royal families of England and Scotland and the potential for a joint monarch, the larger would always dominate the smaller. In a sense, he foresaw James VI moving to London. Those were my two examples until I watched television last night and saw the fascinating report on the whisky industry. I was particularly interested in the Guinness takeover of Distillers. The promise was made that the combined company’s HQ would be in Scotland but, as we know, that did not happen. Much policy on mergers and acquisitions is now decided at a European Union level, so it is not totally within the control of even the United Kingdom Government. However, are France and Germany better at keeping their own companies under local control than we are? Are French and German shareholders more loyal? Do they take a longer-term view, with UK shareholders taking a short-term view? Do the German banks, for example, tend to be involved in a company more for the long term rather than just for the short term? UK and EU policy seems to assume that all mergers and acquisitions are good except in the very few cases in which a monopoly might be created or the European defence industry might be damaged. The Royal Bank of Scotland was the subject of a number of takeover bids before it grew as large as it did. Many of them were opposed in Scotland, but RBS takeovers were eventually allowed. Perhaps they should not have been. If a takeover is bad when the new company is based in London, it is probably equally bad if it is based in Edinburgh. I am not saying that all mergers and takeovers are bad. Although I was not keen for British Caledonian Airways to be taken over by British Airways in 1988—once again killing off almost all BA’s competition in the UK—I accept that air travel is largely an international marketplace and that we should ensure that there is healthy competition primarily at that level. I was interested to see in The Herald on Wednesday 2 January a forecast for mergers and acquisitions in 2013. Again, the assumption seemed to be that they are always a good thing and show growth in the economy, as they create business for certain lawyers and accountants. The result of that free-for-all policy has been banks that are too big to fail and which we are now thinking of breaking up. We have four large accountancy firms in the world, so there is no real competition if audit goes out to tender and it is hard for medium-sized firms to break through. International companies make profits that they move around the world, and we are unclear where those profits were made. I was interested in the Institute for Public Policy Research’s report in which it complains about lack of competition leading to artificially high banking costs. It says: “The best way to increase competition … would be to break up the banks.” If the banks are too big now, we should presumably be trying to prevent them from becoming bigger in future. Present mergers and acquisitions policy in the UK and EU has not been a great success. Regardless of whether we are independent, there need to be improvements, particularly in Scotland. We must be able to start businesses, and we seem to be able to do that. However, once they grow, we need to be able to keep them based here—we need to keep headquarters here.

Does the member feel that the schools have a part to play in that, too? Are they always pointing young people in the right direction for careers?

On Tuesday we had a debate on employability and it is good to have a debate on a related topic today. As I did on Tuesday, I would like to spend a bit of time looking at work experience, but first I will comment on some of the speeches that have been made. I particularly note some of the Labour speeches. For example, Ken Macintosh seemed to be critical of the fact that cuts from Westminster were being passed on. Surely the cuts from Westminster have to be passed on because we have nowhere else to get money from.

Oh, straight in. Okay.

I missed some of the detail of that, because my fellow back benchers were heckling you. Ken Macintosh’s first point was that there is no need to pass on Westminster cuts. There is nowhere else for the money to come from—we have to pass on the Westminster cuts. The question is how we do it and the point has been made—in the Labour amendment especially—that we are looking for more money for colleges, housing and transport, which we all support; however, there has been no suggestion from Labour or, I think, the Tories or Lib Dems, about where that money should come from. I give credit to Alison Johnstone, who suggested that we could trim university funding to give more to colleges. Is that what Labour is saying, or is it saying that the money has to come out of thin air?

I will deal with the second point first. Traditional funding and, preferably, saving, which we should have been doing for many years, is what we should be using for capital projects, primarily. If we can run eight-coach trains from Queen Street to Edinburgh on the railway system more cheaply than running more six-coach trains, which are harmful to the environment, I support the eight-coach trains and the cheaper option. I agree with Mary Scanlon that grants are better than loans. That applies to students, the Prince’s Trust and the social fund. Grants are better than loans—full stop. I agree with Jayne Baxter that universities are not the right way for everybody. I was also interested in Neil Findlay’s criticism of Clare Adamson, saying that she was merely describing the problem, given that he then spent six minutes doing the same. I said that I would like to spend a bit of time on work experience, which was mentioned in Tuesday’s debate. I welcome the report that most employers who take on young people find them ready for work; however, there is still a perception—or indeed the real problem—that many of them lack experience. As a result, I very much welcome the intention behind SDS’s make young people your business campaign to encourage employers to help young people to build up their skills. The issue came up a number of times in the Finance Committee’s employability inquiry and the overall feeling was that there was room for improvement. Schools might be encouraging one-week placements—I have had a number of youngsters in for a week and, indeed, have another coming in next week—but the fact is that there can be a few hoops to go through. For example, in an evidence-taking session for the employability inquiry, a witness from Menzies Hotel said: “Recently, Glasgow City Council surveyed the hotel for a work placement and, in its paperwork, it probably went into more detail than the environmental health officers go into. The person in question was not allowed to pull out a bed, touch anything in the leisure club or do this, that or the other.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 23 May 2012; c 1212.] At the inspection that we had on Monday, we were told that the pupil must not use cleaning materials and there was a question whether the office was warm enough, as if it might not be—which might sometimes be the case. Of course, schools have to be responsible about the places that they let their pupils go to, but I sometimes wonder whether they are making things too difficult for employers. Even a one-week placement is very little. It would be difficult to say that, after it, the employer knew the young person very well or the young person understood the job to any great extent. That is a problem not just for school pupils but for graduates, who cannot get a job or even an interview because they have no experience. I agree, however, that taking on an unpaid intern for a year can be considered exploitation. What, then, is the answer? The motion refers to members being involved in this work and, indeed, as small employers ourselves, we can be involved and set an example. I have been trying to think of some of the things that I could do. In the autumn, I took on a graduate who had no experience and needed some; however, I decided to limit his work experience to 120 to 150 hours to ensure that it would not be considered exploitation. I think that he managed to get reasonable experience and we can now write him a reference that he can use elsewhere. Moreover, real work experience has to be provided. Recently, there has been some media coverage about the Department for Work and Pensions and Jobcentre Plus encouraging employers to change real jobs into work experience in order to meet their targets. Allegedly one Glasgow nightclub took on 40 youngsters for the busy November and December season, had them work unpaid from 7 pm to 3 am and eventually took on only three as actual employees. That is not right and when I raised the matter with one of the agencies that work with the DWP on a recent visit, it said that it had refused to take part in certain schemes that it felt to be dodgy. We all want to do more within our limitations. We can and will do more but we could do a lot more if we were independent.

I am interested in what the member is saying and I think that she is right. Does she have suggestions about how we improve careers guidance at school? Should we get teachers out into the workplace more often? Should we get more business people into schools?

Thank you, Presiding Officer—you become more generous every time I stand up to speak. It gives me pleasure to close the debate on behalf of the committee. I thank all the members who have studied the report and spoken today, especially those who had to look at the report fresh and who do not sit on the committee. One thing that strikes me about the debate is the wide recognition of some of the problems and challenges that we, as a society, face, and the tone of the debate has been extremely healthy from that point of view. I welcome, too, the fact that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has promised a formal response to the committee on the many points raised in the report. Later on I would like to touch on some of the points that members have raised, but I particularly want to speak in more detail about three things that have been mentioned. First is the complexity of the landscape, which was mentioned by a number of members, including Kezia Dugdale and Dennis Robertson, and was touched upon by Kenneth Gibson, the committee convener, in his opening speech. As we acknowledged in our report, part of the problem is that having various strands of Government involved at UK, Scottish and local levels leads to complexity. The number of strategies and schemes is considerable, and we identify a number of them in our report. For example, from the Scottish Government, there are the Skills for Scotland skills strategy—I find that a bit of a mouthful—opportunities for all and its overarching economic strategy. The report notes that Skills Development Scotland is refreshing its get ready for work programme and is working with employers’ groups and others over its design, content and so on. I am not exactly sure who all those others are, but a point made in the committee’s external employability workshops was whether businesses and the third sector were being fully engaged by the public sector. That is an area that we want to focus on in developing and rolling out the strategies. A point made across the three workshops that a number of Finance Committee members attended, which was in relation to the various training schemes available, was that there seemed to be unnecessary duplication of effort and too many funding streams, initiatives and evaluation processes. As one participant put it, the various schemes are “knocking on the doors of employers, which is causing confusion.” Another point made was that there was sometimes an assumption that, when new money becomes available, the public sector will retain it to deliver the service and not look closely enough at getting the private sector involved. A similar point made at the Ardrossan workshop was that businesses should be allowed to get funding to provide training directly, rather than funding being allocated to the employment agencies to provide training that is sometimes not suitable. In its evidence, the Federation of Small Businesses said: “Small businesses do not have time to look around for opportunities to support young people into employment.” The importance of small business has been made a number of times this afternoon, including by Jamie Hepburn. The FSB also said: “Small businesses are wary of national schemes as they suspect them of being overly bureaucratic, involving a high administrative burden, requiring significant compromise and cost for the business.” Even larger businesses, including Asda, have recognised that. It said: “We view the current skills and work-support landscape as complex, and we have people in place to deal with it. I understand the problems that small businesses have in that regard.” That point was reinforced by David Comerford of Menzies Hotels, who said: “Since January, I have received 20 or more calls from different types of organisations, funding bodies and so on and, as was said earlier, it is really difficult to deal with them all. A company usually has only one person to do that work—and in my company that person is me.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 23 May 2012; c 1202 and 1211.] It has to be said that that comment is from a reasonably-sized hotel group. The committee recognises that the complexity of the landscape is, in part, due to the split of responsibilities between the UK and the Scottish Governments. However, we note that, even at a Scottish level, there are a significant number of different initiatives, programmes and strategies. We welcome the action that the Scottish Government is taking to provide clarity of information to employers, and we seek confirmation that the initiatives will be regularly monitored and evaluated. We have also invited the Scottish Government to consider whether a fewer number of programmes encompassing greater flexibility and efficiency might be a way forward. Before I leave that issue, I highlight a point that came up during our external workshops, which is mentioned in our report. In Dumfries, the point was made that it must be worth while for an employer to take on a person for a six-month placement, for example. In Ardrossan the point was made that the Department for Work and Pensions is not keen on long-term placements, because the focus is on getting individuals into paid employment. Participants at the Dundee workshop suggested that the optimum period for work with individuals who are furthest from the labour market is six to 12 months and that continuity of contact is extremely important. Members touched on age limits for programmes. The accessibility of certain programmes, specifically in the context of age, was discussed during the inquiry. It was suggested that current employment initiatives are too focused on the 16 to 19 age group, which often means that older individuals are excluded. The committee noted the cabinet secretary’s comments about the need for employment initiatives to have parameters and his well-made point about the need for programmes to strike a balance between breadth and focus. However, the committee also noted: “a number of the Scottish Government programmes which are likely to be of most relevance to those furthest from the labour market are focused on the 16 to 19 year old age group rather than all 16 to 24 year olds” and therefore exclude people aged 20 and over. The excluded group is likely to include many lone parents who are returning to work. We seek clarification on how decisions were reached on age limits for get ready for work and opportunities for all and on the reason why community jobs Scotland is open only to 16 to 19-year-olds, although it was previously aimed at 18 to 24-year-olds. The committee noted that the new employer recruitment incentive will come under the auspices of opportunities for all, which suggests that only job seekers aged 16 to 19 might benefit from the scheme. John Wilson and Rod Campbell mentioned the issue, and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to consider the matter in more detail. In our three workshops, participants said that building and developing confidence and soft or core skills is a challenge. Murdo Fraser talked about that. At one of our round-table evidence sessions, Tricia Hunter of Minerva People said: “when we have worked one to one with hard-to-place people to find their skills and talents and nurture just one small bit of what they can do, the results have been amazing.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 23 May 2012; c 1211.] In our debate on the committee’s draft budget report before Christmas, I mentioned our session with the David Hume Institute and our discussion about Scotland’s human capital. Although much of the focus was on students and the graduates who emerge from the higher and further education systems, there is a relevant parallel to be drawn. Stephen Boyle, of Royal Bank of Scotland, said: “The human capital challenge emerges not with more highly skilled people but with those who do jobs requiring lower levels of skills and qualifications. If I wanted to worry about something in the human capital sphere in Scotland, it would be that.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 3 October 2012; c 1656.] That was a useful point. Of course, the focus of our inquiry was the people who might lack such skills or qualifications. I wanted to draw attention to comments at our workshops in that regard, but time is a little tight so I will skip over some of that. Members mentioned some of the useful points that were made, but one or two points have not had the attention that they deserved to have. Hanzala Malik talked about college cuts, which we have heard about before. A challenge that the Finance Committee presents to all other committees is that if they want more money for an area, they must tell us where the money should come from. If the universities or whoever must receive less money, let us hear about it. Murdo Fraser talked about work experience, which is vital. The issue came up a lot in the committee and I will talk about it more if I get the opportunity to speak in Thursday’s debate on action to support youth employment. My niece is at the University of Sussex, which Murdo Fraser mentioned. I think that students at the university often have at least one year of intense work experience during their degree courses, and my niece certainly seems to be benefiting from the approach. Just yesterday, someone came to do a health and safety assessment for my office, which took about 25 minutes—I hope that that was worth while for the youngster who is coming to us next week. I very much welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary is open to new thinking and methods and to getting a balance of quantity and quality. The inquiry was useful and I hope that the evidence that was provided, the discussions that we had and the report that the committee produced make a useful contribution to improving opportunities for people who are furthest from the jobs market. I support the motion in the name of the Finance Committee’s convener.

Can Mr Macintosh explain whether he thinks that Mr Swinney could have done something different that would have helped the job situation?

I congratulate you on giving me my full speaking time this year, Presiding Officer. I think that last year I got a bit curtailed by somebody. In closing this debate on behalf of the committee, I thank the cabinet secretary for his assurances that the committee’s report will be responded to in detail. We look forward to that response. I will address three topics to start with, before dealing with statements that were made in the debate and, finally, winding up with some comments on the report. The first topic is skills and employment. As the convener said, the committee has undertaken a separate inquiry into improving employability and published its report on that earlier this month—we hope that that will be the subject of the very next debate in the chamber. Some issues arose that affected both that inquiry and budget scrutiny, and today I will focus on the points that emerged during the draft budget examination. One of the points that were highlighted in the draft budget report was that made by Professor Jeremy Peat during a round-table discussion with the David Hume Institute, when he spoke about making the best use of people and developing people with the right skills. I want to draw attention to a few points on that theme of human capital. For example, in the session with the David Hume Institute, Professor Donald MacRae of Lloyds Banking Group Scotland said: “I do not believe that the explanation for our low economic performance is a low level of human skills or human capital.” A similar point was made by Stephen Boyle of the Royal Bank of Scotland, who said: “Not only is the quality of Scotland’s human capital strong—indeed, it is one of our genuine sources of economic potential—but it is particularly strong at the higher education level.” However, he went on to say: “The human capital challenge emerges not with more highly skilled people but with those who do jobs requiring lower levels of skills and qualifications. If I wanted to worry about something in the human capital sphere in Scotland, it would be that.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 3 October 2012; c 1656.] The second topic that I want to touch on is picking winners, which has already been commented on by one or two speakers, including Stewart Stevenson. In written evidence to the committee, Professor John Kay said: “the appropriate industrial strategy for Scotland is that it should be based on the principle that small countries succeed in the world economy by exporting narrow specialisations on a global scale.” He suggests that that means picking winners by identifying and promoting sectors in which Scotland has a genuine competitive advantage and that “the emphasis should be on sectors that are winners, not on ones that we would like to be winners.” Professor Kay’s contribution was thought provoking, but not everybody agreed with it. For example, a contrasting view on the issue of picking winners was discussed at our round-table session with the David Hume Institute. At the beginning of the session, the convener talked about the evidence that the committee had heard on access to capital and mentioned the point that had been made to us about companies reaching a point at which significant capital is required and they may move the business into another model, for example through being acquired. Professor Colin Mason of the Adam Smith business school at the University of Glasgow said: “The challenge is, therefore, not just to create more high-growth firms but to keep them owned and managed in Scotland. How do we do that? We cannot simply pick winners. We cannot predict in advance where high-growth firms will come from either at the firm level or the sectoral level. A lot of companies that we interviewed said that support at the early stages is critical. We need, therefore, a package of early support that is relevant to potentially high-growth firms. That means things like equity finance, export assistance, and management training.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 3 October 2012; c 1660-1.] Professor Kay considered that “the contribution that the whisky industry makes to the Scottish economy is significantly overestimated.” That was quite a controversial point. He was disappointed in the industry’s contribution, and argued: “The growth of the Scottish whisky industry is not that impressive, given the extent of global growth in spirits consumption. There are a lot of questions that we should be asking about the whisky industry and its contribution to Scotland.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 24 October 2012; c 1713.] More generally in relation to the food and drink industry, Professor Kay stated that he is “not sure” that Scotland’s potential to have a premium brand in food and drink is being realised. Although the session was not part of our draft budget scrutiny, the whisky sector featured in our evidence session with Scottish Enterprise earlier this year, at which the chief executive of Scottish Enterprise said: “The burgeoning middle class in Brazil offers huge opportunities for Scottish consumer goods; for example, one of the fastest-growing markets for whisky is Brazil.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 9 May 2012; c 1085.] Given the points that were made in evidence to the committee, we have invited the Scottish Government to respond to the views of Professor Kay regarding its role in the development of skills and capabilities in areas where Scotland has a genuine competitive advantage and how best to realise Scotland’s potential to have a premium brand in food and drink. The third topic that I will address, which has also been mentioned, is non-domestic rates income, which is addressed on pages 23 and 24 of the report. The committee notes the evidence of Scottish Chambers of Commerce and its comments about NDRI. It said that its members “are acutely aware that they are essentially paying a larger share towards the overall spend in the Scottish budget.” Gavin Brown touched on that latterly, as well. Scottish Chambers of Commerce went on to say: “We believe that that can go only so far before it becomes unsustainable; it cannot go on for ever. We must look for a more equitable way of allocating finance to ensure that non-domestic rates play a proportionate role.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 26 September 2012; c 1634.] The other side to that is that the committee is aware that control over taxes is severely limited at the moment and that, if a company makes profits, we are unable to benefit through corporation tax. The committee notes the concern of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee about any potential shortfall in non-domestic rates income and the impact that that could have. The Finance Committee has, therefore, asked the Scottish Government for more regular reports on collection performance. I will make a few comments on the issues that were raised in the debate. This afternoon, one of the key issues was housing. A number of members have asked where, if more money is to be put into housing, it is to come from. When I intervened on Ken Macintosh, he did not give me an answer to that. Elaine Murray talked about the £40,000 level of HAG and whether that was sustainable. However, she forgot to mention that there have been free reserves in housing associations. Although those cannot be continued year after year, a number of housing associations—for example, Parkhead Housing Association in my constituency—have used their free reserves to continue their development programme. Nevertheless, everybody accepts that that cannot go on for ever.

There is evidence that some housing associations may have used up their reserves and that some—those that were formed by stock transfer—never had any. However, others still have reserves. I am sure that we will get a response on that from the Government in due course. Willie Rennie and others mentioned preventative spending, in which context £1 of spending can maybe save £5 here, £7 there or £9 somewhere else. We are now not choosing between preventative spending and other spending; we are having to choose between different forms of preventative spending and deciding where the money is to come from. The problem is in choosing where to disinvest. I move on to a few comments on the report. The report strikes a good balance; it neither is unduly critical of the Government nor blindly praises the Government for all that it does. The final sentence of paragraph 226 makes that clear. The report did not need any amendment—as Malcolm Chisholm said, it was an excellent report. However, a critical amendment to the report was proposed at the committee and I felt duty bound to propose a balancing one that praised the Government. The reality was that neither amendment was necessary, and I think that it was good that both were defeated. I think that Jean Urquhart got it right by voting against both amendments. It is important that the Parliament’s committees system works well. There is a danger that MSPs in the party of Government blindly support the Government, and Opposition MSPs blindly oppose the Government. Each of us faces the individual challenge of balancing our duties to party and to Parliament as a whole, and I believe that the Finance Committee has had some success in doing that. In conclusion, the committee has raised a number of crucial issues, to which we hope the Scottish Government will respond. The committee will seek to continue its scrutiny of those issues through its draft budget examination next year and through other aspects of our work programme, such as the work on improving employability, our inquiry into demographic change and the ageing population and our scrutiny of the tax powers under the Scotland Act 2012. Those powers have the potential to put much more teeth into future budgets. I support the motion in the name of the convener.

Much of the Commonwealth games activity will be in Glasgow, and much of that will be in the east end of Glasgow, which I welcome. However, we want to emphasise at the outset that these are Scotland’s games, not just Glasgow’s games. I am sure that we will hear about venues in Angus, Lanarkshire and Edinburgh, but there is a lot more to the games than its venues. For example, the idea for the mascot came to us from Cumbernauld, and men and women will come from all over the country to take part in the games as a member of the Scottish team, as well as to be spectators. The minister mentioned security in her speech, and we should welcome her statement and the money that will be available—Patricia Ferguson got that right. We want the games to be friendly, but we have to have a balance. We live in the modern world and we have to accept that significant security is required. I hope that Glasgow Community and Safety Services will be part of the security arrangements. It is the arm of Glasgow City Council that looks after CCTV and security. I hope that its existing infrastructure can be used, and perhaps some of the infrastructure that will be put in place can be used after the games. It has been mentioned that some of the venues are coming along very well. Perhaps the most impressive, as Nanette Milne said, is the Emirates arena in the east end of Glasgow, which includes the velodrome and the indoor sports arena. The venue’s size is impressive, and it creates many opportunities. For example, when I visited the other week, the Scottish international badminton championships were taking place. There was room for the championships in one venue and room in the centre of the velodrome for youngsters to learn and practise badminton. They could then go through to watch some of the top players from around the world playing badminton. There is nowhere else in Scotland where all of those things could have happened under one roof. Smaller venues cannot provide such opportunities. That is an example of the legacy already happening. Many of us think that a legacy comes after an event, but we are already benefiting from a legacy before the event. There is already community use of the venues. I believe that membership of Glasgow club, which is the membership system for those who use Glasgow’s gyms, has already increased by around 1,000. There have also been international competitions, such as the UCI track cycling world cup in the velodrome, and the Glasgow Rocks basketball team are now using the arena. Other venues are still being developed, including those for swimming at Tollcross and for hockey at Glasgow Green. I understand that there have been some slight delays in deciding whether Scottish Hockey will operate the venue after the games. I know that there are legal issues that have to be sorted out. Scottish Hockey is quite a small organisation and Glasgow City Council is a very big organisation, and I hope that the minister will be able to help to smooth out the process. I want to mention the games village. Those who knew the site before will know that it was in a very run-down industrial area. There will be 700 homes and a care home, which was mentioned. There will be a housing mix, with bought houses and 300 social rented houses. I visited the village last Monday, and I thank Mactaggart and Mickel for showing me around. I was very impressed, and I was particularly struck by three things in visiting the houses. First, in one room, the beds were already set up, which has happened in plenty of time. Secondly, the interesting thing about those beds is that they came from the London Olympics and are being reused, which is extremely good. They also have extensions for long people. In one room in which there were beds, it was interesting to see that there were sockets halfway up the wall, one of which was marked “Cooker” and one of which was marked “Washing Machine”. The kitchens are not required during the Commonwealth games, because all the food will be prepared elsewhere, so the athletes can use the rooms that will become kitchens as sleeping accommodation. Thirdly, we went into a quite large room in which the central heating radiator on the wall was very small compared with what I would have expected. The explanation for that is that the standard of insulation is so good in the houses that not so much heating is needed, which will mean a big saving financially and for the environment. It is clear that the games village is leading the way in that respect. The hot water will be provided by a district heating system, so there will be no individual boilers; the water will be heated centrally and piped round the area. Again, that will save money and will be good for the environment. Volunteers have already been mentioned, and it is great that so many volunteers will come. The website says that it is all about Scotland’s “friendliest, most obliging people”. I am not sure that all MSPs fit into that description, but I am sure that at least some do. If people who live further afield want to be a volunteer, perhaps I could put up one or two people on the floor of my flat, if they would like that. We want to encourage young people to get excited about the games. One thing that impresses me in my constituency is the uniformed youth organisations—the guides, scouts and so on. I was a little surprised and disappointed to hear that the games organisers are looking only at individuals to be volunteers and are not willing to consider those organisations. I wonder whether there is some way to take that issue forward. In conclusion, I am tremendously enthusiastic about the games—in fact, I asked whether I could get two speaking slots today, but was told that I could have only one. We are already seeing many tangible benefits. As well as the venues and the village, we are seeing the M74 completion, the east end regeneration route and the vastly improved Dalmarnock station, which, I hope, will bring more people to the games by public transport. I encourage all members to go back to their communities and enthuse about the games.

Will the member give way?

Would the member accept that one of the challenges for Glaswegians—and maybe one of the hopes for today’s debate—is to encourage MSPs and people from around Scotland to feel that the games belong to them and not that they are being held somewhere else?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the Jobcentre Plus system of encouraging work experience is having on its policies that support people into paid employment. (S4T-00162)

As the minister said, work experience is clearly a very good thing. However, the Sunday Mail indicated that Jobcentre Plus managers are under pressure to encourage employers to turn paid vacancies into unpaid work experience. Can the minister tell us whether there are any estimates of the number of people filling real jobs in Scotland under the guise of work experience? Will the Scottish Government make urgent representations to Westminster regarding that practice?

I am grateful that the minister has already written to the Westminster Government; that is excellent. Does she agree that, if the allegations are true, it is exploitation of people in Scotland who are looking for real work? Does she also agree that Jobcentre Plus and the DWP should be on the side of job applicants if there are unscrupulous employers out there? Can the Scottish Government do anything to offer such protection if the DWP will not? Finally, does the minister agree that Westminster’s record on running the DWP has been very poor and that that is another disadvantage of Scotland remaining in the UK?

Will there be an option in the next franchise to allow for improved connection between rail and bus transport? We do not want a monopoly, but we could do with some improvements.

Will the member give way?

Clearly, a lot has already been said on the subject both today and in the media beforehand. The key issue for me is that we have tried a totally voluntary system but it has not worked and we need a stronger system in future. There is a balance to be struck between freedom on the one hand and responsibility and being held to account on the other, but that is a balance that needs to be found in many areas of life. As individual MSPs, we have to balance freedom with responsibility. Every citizen has to get that balance right, or society will act. The broadcast media have to get that balance as well, so it is clearly nonsense to say that statutory involvement means no freedom. It has been said that the work of The Daily Telegraph is a good example of press freedom, as it led to the exposure of the MPs’ expenses scandal. I think that Hugh Henry was referring to that earlier when he said that, in some cases, politicians should be doing the work that the media is doing. I have to say that I was elected as an MP just too late to begin fiddling my expenses. As I understand it, the Telegraph was using stolen material. However, it seems to me that, if there is one lesson to be learned from that episode, it is not that newspapers should be encouraged to break the law but that there should be more openness in general, for example through stronger freedom of information legislation. The Finance Committee will be looking at that issue tomorrow. I want to touch on the issue of attitude. The Finance Committee has taken evidence on employability, and a number of employers stressed to us that the attitude of applicants is more important than their qualifications on paper. The point about the importance of attitude also applies to our debate today. Many of us have travelled or would travel miles and miles to appear on the radio, on TV or otherwise in the media. Are we, as politicians, too obsessed with the media? Are we too worried about tomorrow’s headlines? If so, that is bound to create unhealthy relationships. It is not just rules and regulations that need to change, but our internal attitudes. We should be wary of pointing at individual MSPs and saying that one is closer to the media than another. The reality is that we are all too concerned about media opinion of us, and we should take collective responsibility for that. On the mace are the words “justice”, “compassion”, “wisdom” and “integrity”. Are we being wise when we deal with the media? Are we dealing with the media with integrity? I believe that those values do not hold only for the 129 politicians in the Parliament; they apply outside the Parliament, including to the media. Does the training of journalists include consideration of wisdom, justice, compassion and integrity? Are those values taken into account in the recruitment process and when people are promoted? A number of professions are struggling with questions of ethics and values, including my profession of accountancy, in which there has often been an emphasis on keeping within the rules, but the bigger picture has been lost. In that regard, I was struck by what Lord Andrew Phillips—who I believe is a Lib Dem peer—said at a recent charities ceremony. In relation to business, he said that there had been “staggering corruption at the heart of the City and other financial centres”. He encouraged the belief that there are other values in charities. He said: “we parliamentarians kid ourselves that passing endless laws which are rarely reviewed or implemented solves social problems ... All of us must work for a renaissance of moral values—our British reputation”— I will forgive him for that— “for integrity should still enable us to take the lead.” It will be good if whether Scotland should take a different route from the UK can be discussed among the party leaders on Thursday, but we should not be afraid of taking a different route. Some members have come across as being a bit timid. Sure, let us talk more about the issue and try to agree on a way forward, but once we have decided on one, let us be bold.

Patricia Ferguson has given an example from Dundee, but does she accept that the Royal Strathclyde Blindcraft Industries, which I think is located in her constituency, is another good example of a supported workshop?

I can tell the member that that is not just the case in Aberdeen—it is the same in Glasgow. As I understand it, RSBI is profitable, and one thing that it has done that Remploy has not done is to develop its products. It has changed over the years, and it has worked with the Glasgow Housing Association and other organisations.

Does Mary Scanlon accept that people thought that they could not go to London during the Olympics because the Olympics were on? We do not want such a message; we want people to come to Glasgow at the same time as the Commonwealth games are on.

Will the member give way?

No!

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree that if we could get businesspeople to come to Glasgow or Edinburgh, for example, and 40 per cent of those businesspeople came back again, they would be likely to go to the Borders, the Highlands and elsewhere?

I take the member’s point about the good things that Glasgow has done, but does he accept that a success of the SECC is that despite its being publicly owned it is kept at a distance from Glasgow City Council and there has not been political interference?

We have heard a lot of good news at the national level—for example, 23 per cent of all international association conferences in the UK are hosted in Scotland. We have some great venues, scenery, food and drink, history and golf—all the things that attract people. However, members will perhaps not be surprised if I concentrate on Glasgow. Glasgow attracts 2.3 million visitors per year, who contribute £595 million to the local economy. The age profile of people who come to Glasgow is younger than the national average—45 per cent of them are under 35, in comparison with a national average of 32 per cent. Some 30,000 people are employed in tourism-related activities in Glasgow. We have more than 6,500 hotel rooms within 5 miles of the SECC, 9,000 rooms within 10 miles of it and 18,000 rooms in metropolitan Glasgow, if guest houses, bed and breakfasts and university accommodation are included. The SECC has been mentioned. I should perhaps declare that I was a non-executive director of it for about a year, when I was a councillor from 2007 to 2008. It is majority owned by Glasgow City Council and has given the city a huge boost through conferences and many other events. It is a success in the public sector that is owned by the public sector, but it is without interference, and the majority of the directors are not councillors. If we are mentioning individuals, a lot of the SECC’s success and growth took place under Charlie Gordon and Steven Purcell, as well as taking place under the present leadership. In 2012, the SECC was again voted the best UK conference centre. People who have visited the SECC site recently will have seen the Scottish Hydro arena being built. The Hydro, which will have a capacity of 12,000 and is due to open in September 2013, will be suitable for music and sport events and for conferences. It is needed because the SECC does not have halls that are big enough for some events and does not have permanent seating. The Hydro could host 140 events each year, which could inject £131 million into Glasgow’s economy. It is expected to be one of the top five busiest indoor arenas in the world, along with Madison Square Garden and the O2 in London. I understand from the SECC that one of its aims after the new venue is open will be to establish more of a trade exhibition portfolio, which could initiate growth in the local economy, through international buyers coming to Glasgow. Glasgow City Marketing Bureau has been mentioned. It brings together venues, hotels, support services and creative industries to present a really joined-up approach to conference organisers from around the world. Some of the figures are impressive. Since the bureau was set up in 2005, it has brought £958 million to the city’s economy and 3 million conference delegate hotel room nights, which represents one in five of the hotel beds that are sold in Glasgow. In 2012, the organisation was voted the UK’s best convention bureau for the sixth year in a row. If we look forward to 2017, 278 conventions are confirmed, with a value of £120 million. That equates to 410,000 delegate hotel room nights. As has been said, Glasgow has benefited from VisitScotland’s £2 million national conference bid fund. The minister said that £527,000 had been put in and that we got £56 million out, which is about £106 for every £1 that was invested, if I did my figures correctly. I think that that return is even better than was suggested.

I thank the minister for that clarification. I will give another clarification. Although a lot of conferences and conventions come to the cities, they have a huge spin-off. People visit other parts of Scotland on an extended break, and we can encourage them to do that in the future. We need to continue to work on that. Mark Griffin mentioned the seven initial conventions that were won for Glasgow through the national bid fund—I believe that that figure is now up to 15 and that 30,000 delegates are due to come. The conventions include the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health conference in 2013 and the world biomaterials congress in 2020. The Diabetes UK conference is an example of a very successful conference that took place in Glasgow. The conference, which took place in March, was attended by some 2,800 scientists and healthcare professionals. Only four places in Britain were big enough to hold it—the others were London, Manchester and Liverpool. One of the strengths of that conference was the relationship between the SECC, Glasgow City Marketing Bureau, Kelvingrove art gallery—which held a dinner that Glasgow Life was involved in—and the lord provost from the council. The national health service linked into the conference, with general practitioners being encouraged to attend. Publicity and roadshows around the city raised the profile of diabetes and encouraged referrals to GPs. We need to play to our strengths. Clearly, our weather is not always attractive to us but it can be attractive to other people. The fact that we speak English can also be a real positive for us. One reason why I like to go to Ireland is that I leave the UK but can still speak English. Scotland loses out by being in the union, and once we are independent our higher international profile will help us attract many more conferences.

I thank Nigel Don for raising the subject and for securing the debate. When I was younger, I thought that all good films were made in America, the duff ones were made in England and virtually none was made in Scotland. What changed that for me was going to the cinema—I think it was in 1994—to see “Shallow Grave”. That was the first time I remember coming out of a cinema having really enjoyed a Scottish film and feeling proud that we could do something like that ourselves. I suppose that the fact that I found it funny also says something about my sense of humour. However, it has been clear for a number of years that although urban and Highlands settings are ideal for films, we lack the “post-production, studio, and sound stage facilities”, as referred to in the motion. Clearly the subject matter of films that are made in Scotland varies enormously. The motion mentions “Brave”—I did not realise that it was based on Scottish literature. However, it was an enjoyable film and it follows in a line of many films that have been set in Scotland in recent years. “The House of Mirth” in 2000, starring Gillian Anderson, used Glasgow City Chambers and is one of a number of films that have used Glasgow’s buildings and the fact that the grid system in the Glasgow streets closely resembles many American cities. More Scottish films that I have enjoyed in recent years have included “My Name is Joe” in 1998, which featured the Forth and Clyde canal if memory serves me correctly; “Sweet Sixteen”, set in Inverclyde; “Red Road”, which used the high flats in Glasgow; and one of my favourites in recent years, “Neds” in 2010, which I felt had a strong message about a youngster with no positive adult role models in his life, either at home or in school, who went seriously off the rails. That is not to mention animated films such as “Brave” and another recent film, “The Illusionist”, which is set in Edinburgh and the Highlands. I am, of course, keen that any new facility be located in Glasgow. BBC Scotland and STV are located close together at Pacific Quay on the south bank of the Clyde. Glasgow City Council deliberately targeted that area for media development with the building of the Squinty bridge across the river, so it would seem to be the obvious location if we are going to develop in that field. As well as specifically Scottish and Scottish-themed films, a number of major Hollywood productions have used Glasgow as a location. Mark Griffin mentioned “World War Z”—or, as I am instructed by my more American-orientated friends, “World War Zee”—which features Brad Pitt in George Square and Cochrane Street. It was fascinating to see the city transformed to look like Philadelphia, right down to the information boards having Philadelphia maps stuck on them in place of the Glasgow maps. Another recent film that was shot in Glasgow is “The Fast and the Furious 6”, which I understand involved some 250 crew working through the night in the Broomielaw, Cadogan Street and Wellington Street areas. The Glasgow Film Office estimates that those three weeks of filming injected some £20 million into the economy, which is very encouraging. I also understand that in 2011 the Glasgow Film Office received more than 300 location enquiries, which resulted in more than 200 productions being shot in the city, slightly less than half of which were for TV. I thought that I had better go to the cinema last night to prepare for the debate. I saw “Skyfall”, which I was glad to see featured Scotland towards the end of the film, although I had to wait until I was the very last person in the cinema to see the National Trust for Scotland appear in the credits. Perhaps we could be a bit higher up the credits in the future. The challenge is to see whether we can expand on the benefits and keep more of the work that surrounds such films in the local economy. We do not want to be the country that has its raw materials extracted by multinational companies while we receive only the crumbs. If I was to disagree with one point in Nigel Don’s motion, it would be the claim that “it is unlikely that there will be any long-lasting legacy or benefit” From a film’s being shot in Scotland. I believe that filming in Scotland is positive because it attracts tourists, conferences and so on, but I am otherwise happy to support the motion.

I accept Gavin Brown’s point about consistency across the UK, but does he accept that the provision would mean inconsistency with environmental regulations, which are quite different?

We are hearing from across the chamber that the starting point is that FOI legislation is a good thing and that, on the whole, openness is good and secrecy is bad. Obviously, there can be exceptions, but our starting point should be to presume that information should be in the public domain rather than to presume that it should not be. In that regard, many good things are happening. Information is released in the vast majority of cases, and I think that more than 70 per cent of the Scottish Information Commissioner’s decisions have been in the Government’s favour. Therefore, I found slightly disappointing both Paul Martin’s tone and his suggestion that the Government is not open. The real debate today is about the fact that organisations that are covered by FOI are generally open whereas organisations that are not covered by FOI are not. The bill seeks to strengthen FOI in a number of ways, including through a strengthening of the deterrent against the deliberate destruction of information and a reduction in the lifespans of exemptions. I think that most of us welcome those proposals, but there have been areas that have been disappointing to the Finance Committee, civic society and the public at large. We have already heard about exemptions for the royal family. I certainly endorse the recommendations in paragraph 34 of the Finance Committee’s report on the bill. It is good that the cabinet secretary said that she is giving the matter full and serious consideration—that is also mentioned in paragraph 23 of the report—although, personally, I do not get too excited about the royal family. I want to concentrate more on other organisations, which are covered in paragraphs 57 to 78 of the report. Two main types of organisation might be considered for inclusion under FOI. First, there are bodies that were previously covered by FOI as part of an organisation that was covered by it, such as a council, but then moved out. We call them ALEOs—arm’s-length external organisations—and there are many in Glasgow. Glasgow Life, for example, used to be part of Glasgow City Council and would have been covered by FOI, but it moved out as a separate legal charity. Bringing that organisation back in would be considered to be returning to the starting point rather than expanding the reach of FOI. A number of witnesses made that point to the committee. In its submission, Unison said that freedom of information rights should “follow the money” and that, if they do not, “the growing number of public services delivered by private companies and other bodies not currently covered by” FOI will remain beyond a key tool of scrutiny and accountability. The point has also been made that it could cost more to have organisations not scrutinised than scrutinised. Unison made the point that progressively less information could be available. Similarly, the Campaign for Freedom of Information in Scotland’s briefing states: “CFoIS believes the public’s right to know is now far weaker than when FoISA was passed by the Scottish Parliament in 2002 and became effective in 2005. The key reason is that S5 of FoISA has never been used to add/designate more bodies.” I accept Nicola Sturgeon’s point that there has been a bit of a changeover, but there has not been a major increase in the bodies that are covered up to now. The campaign’s briefing also states: “Our ‘information access right’ is strong and enforceable but the range of information we can access is getting smaller as public services are increasingly moved to other bodies and those bodies are not covered by FoISA. CFoIS wants our right to access ‘public information’ to be restored as well as extended.” That relates to my point about the two types of organisation—restoring the coverage that existed before for some organisations and extending coverage to other organisations. Should we expand FOI to other organisations? There is certainly an appetite for that in some circles, especially if the organisation receives public funds. For example, Paul Martin mentioned social rented housing. I think that he said that local, smaller housing associations are often quite good but national housing associations are perhaps more doubtful. I would include Glasgow Housing Association as one of the more doubtful ones in respect of how open it has been throughout its life. That seems to be something of an anomaly to me. From speaking to housing associations, it appears to me that some are very relaxed about FOI, and some—I accept—are less so. Audit Scotland made a good point, which is included in paragraph 64 of the report and which Kenneth Gibson has already quoted, so I will not repeat it. The public are concerned about the service that is provided but less concerned—in fact, they may be confused—about the legal entity that provides it. Cost is sometimes raised as a reason for not extending freedom of information, but that is the wrong place to start. Surely, we should first ask whether particular information should be in the public domain and then, if there is a cost, we should ask as a secondary question who should bear that cost. There is broad acceptance that costs should be shared in some way between the person who requests the information and the organisation that is asked for it. That can always be adjusted over time. However, I do not accept that cost should be the starting point in deciding whether access to information should be available. It has been suggested that ministers already have powers to extend the list of organisations that are included under section 5. I welcome Nicola Sturgeon’s assurance that there will be regular review in future. For me, the key point is that we are looking for the right to get information, not just the possibility that information might be available. One point that came up at the briefing that Willie Rennie hosted yesterday is that there is a cultural problem of secrecy. We really want to change that culture.

I thank Iain Gray for giving way. He almost seems to be arguing against the 2002 act if he is saying that it is not operating properly as regards the bodies that it covers at the moment. Is that what he is saying?

Does the member think that legislation will be sufficient to change the culture, or do we need to do something else?

I will speak more loudly if there is any noise in the background. I thank all members who signed the motion and the Deputy Presiding Officer and his colleagues for allowing the debate to take place. The Commonwealth games in 2014 must be among the most exciting events in Scotland for a very long time. The games will run for 11 days, from 23 July to 3 August 2014, and will involve 17 sports at 14 venues. We expect that more than 4,500 athletes from 71 nations will take part. Scotland will take part in her own right, of course. With the London Olympics now in the past, the attention of many people is switching to Scotland for the 2014 games. I certainly felt that on 3 October this year, when we had a games reception in Holyrood. Many of us met the games mascot for the first time at that reception. I noted that evening that, given Glasgow’s footballing history, it is appropriate that a thistle is the mascot and that it is called Clyde. The venues are coming along well—they are on time and on budget. The motion refers to the fact that the Commonwealth Games Federation has been extremely positive about how things are going in that respect. One of the reasons why Glasgow won the games in the first place was the excellent facilities that were already in place. Other cities would have had to do much more to catch up, let alone match the progress that we have made since we won the bid. However, we must not be complacent, of course. Some of the venues inevitably have to come on stream quite late. Hampden Park is an example of that. Queen’s Park will leave the stadium, and the athletics facilities will need to be installed immediately before the games. I am delighted that five of the 14 venues are in the Glasgow Shettleston constituency. The velodrome and the Commonwealth arena are now operational and Tollcross pool is coming along. There will be hockey at Glasgow Green, and Celtic Park will be used for the opening ceremony. Of course, not least of the facilities is the athletes village, which is transforming that part of the east end of Glasgow hugely and which will leave us with social rented housing, a care home and private homes. Other venues in Glasgow will include Ibrox for the rugby; Hampden for athletics; Kelvingrove for the bowling; Scotstoun for squash and table tennis; the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre for six sports; and Cathkin Braes for the mountain biking. Of course, the games are not just Glasgow games. I re-emphasise that there is activity outside Glasgow, at locations that include Strathclyde country park for the triathlon; the Commonwealth pool in Edinburgh for the diving; and Barry Buddon in Angus for the shooting. A particularly topical issue this week is the start of the volunteer programme. Around 15,000 volunteers are required, and it is now possible to register interest in being a volunteer, which I did yesterday, although the formal application process will start in January. I gather that interviews will run from April next year, possibly through to the beginning of 2014. Each volunteer will receive around three days’ training. The volunteering has a variety of strands. Last Friday, I attended the launch of more than gold in Glasgow, which is the umbrella campaign for the churches’ involvement in the Commonwealth games. At previous games, churches have offered hospitality for the families of athletes, some of whom frankly would not be able to afford accommodation unless they are given help. No major event such as the Commonwealth games would be complete without a few questions being asked along the way. One question that constituents sometimes ask me is whether the resources could be better used elsewhere. I touched on that when I said that, because Glasgow already had many venues in place, the investment has not been as big as other cities might have had to make. That is a real plus point. I am the first to argue for more investment in housing at every opportunity, but we must realise that, historically, housing in itself is not sufficient. The examples of areas such as Easterhouse in the north-east of Glasgow and other post-war schemes show that even good-quality housing on its own is not enough to give life to a community and a city. We need jobs and other activities to help us to meet the targets on issues such as improving physical activity and health. Another question has been about sponsors. One problem when we had the games previously in Edinburgh was the serious lack of sponsors, which led to challenges right up until shortly before the games began. Therefore, the number of sponsors that are already on board is encouraging, and I believe that more are to come. The sponsors include Scotland-based companies such as Harper Macleod, SSE and AG Barr, whom people might know as the makers of Irn-Bru. Just yesterday, Emirates was announced as an official sponsor for the games, which is in addition to its naming rights for the Emirates arena. For clarification, that includes the Chris Hoy velodrome and the Commonwealth arena. There can sometimes be a bit of confusion about all the names and what they mean. However, we have not lost the Chris Hoy velodrome—it is part of the Emirates arena. It has been suggested that only good companies should be sponsors, while bad companies should be excluded. The problem with that is how we define a good and bad company. I guess that no company is wholly good and probably no company is wholly bad. If we put our pensions and savings only into good companies, I suspect that there might not be many places to put them. I suggest that, just like people, most companies are a mixture of good and bad. It is encouraging that sponsorship is coming in. The profile of the word “legacy” has increased hugely as a result of the Olympics and Commonwealth games. Obviously, the physical infrastructure, including sporting, housing and transport infrastructure, will be the main lasting legacy, but we want more than that—we want to encourage more people to be active. Interestingly, the Age Scotland briefing for today’s debate points out that only 9 per cent of older people do the recommended levels of physical activity. Can we increase the figure and encourage more activity? I certainly hope so. We are not always good at that in the Parliament building. We have beautiful staircases, but many of us use the lifts. The games give us the opportunity to increase physical activity in general and specifically sports participation. I thank the Parliament for the opportunity to debate the issue. I hope that we can join together in looking forward to and working towards the Commonwealth games in Scotland in 2014.

Clearly, drugs are a less common problem than alcohol, but they are still serious. There were 584 drug-related deaths in 2011, which is a sobering statistic. Glasgow’s drug problem is worse than that of the rest of Scotland. It is clear from the debate that different approaches are suitable for different people and that there should not be a one-size-fits-all approach. I believe that that is why the road to recovery programme has been such a big step in the right direction. In the east end of Glasgow some years ago, Glasgow Calton Athletic and David Bryce won a lot of respect for their approach to helping drug addicts, which was a zero-tolerance approach with an emphasis on sport and fitness in the drug addicts’ lives. David Bryce was a former drug addict. There was a lot of criticism of him at the time because his approach was slightly different from what Glasgow was doing generally, and there were quite a lot of clashes with the public agencies. However, it seems that he was a forerunner of some of the things that we are doing now. I think that he talked a lot of sense. Incidentally, on a lighter note, during the 2008 Shettleston by-election the Deputy First Minister and I met some of the recovering addicts, who were heavily engaged in football. It has to be said that all of them and the Deputy First Minister were better at football than I was. Another approach is zero tolerance with a religious emphasis. A number of groups in Scotland and overseas have taken that approach. Again, that is perhaps not appropriate for everybody, but it is for some. A book that I read years ago called “Chasing the Dragon” ago still sticks in my mind. It was written by Jackie Pullinger and was about her work in Hong Kong with drug addicts. Methadone is the right and helpful approach for some people, as long as it is part of an overall treatment package. Some years ago when I was a councillor in Glasgow, there was a lot of criticism of the methadone programme because so many users were not getting any treatment or support in addition. It seems to me that there has been a huge change since then.

I am happy to pass that on as and when I get the opportunity. The point about taking a joined-up approach is important, and I was just going to touch on it. Christine Grahame mentioned it, too. I remember that some years ago I was at the interview of David Crawford, who is about to retire from being in charge of social work in Glasgow City Council. At the time of his interview he worked for Renfrewshire Council. Glasgow recognised that Renfrewshire was doing something better as, when the police were involved in a drugs case and found children in the household, they immediately referred them to social work. That did not happen in Glasgow at that time. We can learn from each other, and that was an extremely good lesson. I was recently given a report that was published last month by the Glasgow city alcohol and drug partnership. In it, a representative of Glasgow community and safety services says: “This year, we’ve seen the establishment of various Recovery Cafés across the city, 120 supporters of Recovery taking part in the Great Scottish Run, numerous conversation cafes taking place and Recovery groups becoming key to planning and delivering events at GRAND week 2012.” There are quite a lot of positive lessons that we can learn. George Adam referred to the joined-up approach in relation to pharmacies. There has been a public reaction, on occasion, against drug addicts hanging around pharmacies. When a new pharmacy is proposed in a community, as one was in my constituency recently, people ask whether methadone will be dispensed. Again, however, I think that there has been quite a lot of improvement in recent years. In the summer, I visited a pharmacy in Shettleston, which happened to be part of the Co-op, and I was very impressed. The one thing that impressed me the most—apart from the fact that the facilities were much better than they used to be—was the personal relationship that the pharmacist can have with their patients, especially those using methadone. Whereas a GP’s time is often extremely limited, it is possible for the pharmacist to build up a really good knowledge of the patient and, if there is a fluctuation from day to day, week to week or month to month, that can be picked up quite quickly. When I was at Westminster, during the previous round of welfare reforms, it was suggested that treatment should be compulsory and people’s benefits should be cancelled if they did not take part in treatment. I and the Scottish Government of the time—and, I assume, the whole Scottish Parliament—were strongly opposed to that, and I assume that we would oppose it in future because, if we take benefits away from folk, the kids will be damaged and the grandparents will have to pay the bills.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what support will be provided to staff at the Freshlink factory in Shettleston, who have been told that the factory is closing and moving its business to England. (S4T-00097)

I thank the minister for his reply and for the fact that both the Government and Glasgow City Council are putting so much effort into helping the employees now that the decision has been made. Can the minister confirm that considerable assistance was offered to Freshlink by Glasgow City Council, the Scottish Government, Scottish Enterprise and Clyde Gateway among others, but that the company has shown little enthusiasm for finding a solution that would let it continue in Glasgow?

I thank the minister for the reassurance, especially about his continuing support for Clyde Gateway, which has been one of the players. When the minister meets the management on Friday, will he discuss how the workforce will be dealt with over the coming weeks? One or two constituents who have come to me are very uncertain about when their end date will be and are therefore not able to apply for another job in case they would lose their redundancy payment. Can the minister reassure us that that will be on his agenda?

Thank you, Presiding Officer, I look forward to lots of interventions. I am the final speaker for the Scottish National Party. One reason for that is that, unfortunately, Dave Thompson cannot be with us due to family illness. He has devoted a lot of time and effort to this subject and has made progress on it. I commend him for that. As Margaret McCulloch has just said, we need to look at the whole question of alcohol, although today we are focusing specifically on alcohol in relation to driving. As a number of speakers have said, we accept that we have a problem in Scotland with alcohol. I do not think that it is helpful for us to compare ourselves with England at every turn, but we have to be realistic—we have more of a problem than a number of other countries have, and that certainly seems to include England. There is not one easy answer. A number of speakers have made the point that we need to change people’s way of thinking. That is difficult, but it has been done before—the example of seat belts has been given already. The requirement to wear a seat belt was considered quite draconian when that law was introduced, yet it is now widely accepted and adhered to. Similarly with smoking—it has moved from being seen as very cool right across society to a point where many people now apologise if they smoke, and they go outside. Our attitude to alcohol can change and that, I believe, is why minimum pricing is so important. It is not just a question of whether we can predict things exactly—whether the policy will affect 25, 50 or 75 per cent of people, or whatever. As Richard Simpson said, the attitude has been changed in France, for example, and it is important that we send out the message that, as much as many of us enjoy alcohol, it is a potentially harmful substance.

That widens the debate. The member makes useful points. I was going to say something later on—I will just say it now—about carrots and sticks. It is not just a question of beating people up on this and a number of other issues. It is also about offering people alternatives and making the alternatives attractive—I absolutely agree that the employer can be part of that. Public transport has not been mentioned much, but there have been good examples of public transport initiatives, such as the free buses that have been laid on in some cities around hogmanay. That is a very good initiative, which could perhaps be expanded. However, a problem in some of our cities, such as Glasgow, where I am from, is that public transport often stops too early for people coming out of nightclubs at perhaps 3 or 4 o’clock in the morning. Taxis are very expensive—I consider them to be quite a luxury and try not to use them. We need a joined-up approach, which should include public transport. Perhaps a good employer could lay on a free bus for staff.

Absolutely. Encouraging one person to go without and not to drink is exactly the kind of carrot that we need. I said that our attitude to alcohol needs to change. The debate is clearly focused on alcohol and driving, but I use the word “our” deliberately, because I confess that, after having had a few drinks the night before, I have driven in the morning, and I have certainly wondered whether I was over the limit. I suspect that over the course of my life I have been over the limit once or twice. As has been said, I suspect that a lot of people who would not have considered driving the night before have taken the risk in the morning. As James Dornan said, the current limit sends out the message that some drinking and driving is okay. That leads us to decide where we draw the line. My own line has tended to be that I would have one glass of wine with a meal if I am out for a few hours in the evening. However, it is easy to make that one pint of beer, and it is easy for that one pint to become two pints and perhaps for the meal to become only a packet of crisps. We drift along in such a way that the two become acceptable together: we drift into thinking that it is okay to drink and drive. I think that we are agreed that the limit cannot be zero for practical reasons, but the position that we want to move towards is this: if someone is driving, they do not drink. I confess that since moving into politics my attitude has changed a little bit, because I am fairly sure that getting caught for drink-driving would not do an awful lot for my political career.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I agree with Clare Adamson’s point that the attitude of the whole of society has to change. People such as James Dornan are a lot older than me, but I can identify with some of the comments that members have made about attitudes changing over time. Dick Lyle talked about driving his father around, and I used to drive my father around, too—it was great to get my hands on the Triumph 2000, I think it was, that he drove at that time. A whole attitude change is required. I see the change that has taken place in my life, and now I want to move to the position that, when I go out for a meal, I do not have a drink. I think that many of us need to move in that direction, which is why I have said that our attitude needs to change. The Scotland Act 2012 is pretty second rate on a number of fronts, and many of us would disagree with it on a number of issues. Having been on the Scotland Bill Committee, I find it particularly disappointing that we were given only some powers over drink-driving and not others. I think that that happened because there is a fear at Westminster that if Scotland becomes too different from England, independence becomes inevitable, so even good changes must be resisted if they mean that Scotland would become too different from England.

I will conclude, Presiding Officer. I find the Conservative amendment somewhat disappointing. I agree with Alison McInnes’s comments about it. The wording looks sensible at first glance, but then we see that it is just about delay, trying to put things off and not actually doing anything. It contains phrases such as “must not be implemented until”; it calls for things to be “fully explored”, even though, of course, the cynical might say that nothing ever gets fully explored; it says that the Government must “fully consider” things; and it speaks of “unintended consequences”, although everything that we do has unintended consequences. I suggest that the amendment would not really take us anywhere. I am happy to support the motion. Thank you for the leniency that you have shown me with regard to time, Presiding Officer.

Will the member take an intervention?

As far as England is concerned, the evidence that was received by the Finance Committee was that no one knows whether the problems with property are a result of the downturn in the economy or the legislation. There is no evidence.

The member used the word “definitive”. Does she accept that we are not in definitive territory, or even legal territory, because all these things—[Interruption.]

Does the member accept that all these things are subject to negotiation? Does she accept that we are going into a negotiation on all of this and the lawyers cannot give us definite positions?

I very much appreciate what the member is saying, but does he think that only rural communities can learn from Gigha, or is there the possibility that some urban communities that have a problem with land ownership could also learn from it?

The minister said in his statement that we require a different model going forward. Can he give us any indication whether it is likely that in the interim period a non-profit Government-controlled company will run the railway? Will he be seeking powers for Scotland so that we could run railways with a non-profit method in future?

I certainly support evaluation, but does Gavin Brown agree that there is a challenge with it? Earlier, he mentioned that those who are further away from the job market need help. The danger with evaluation is that we will emphasise too much those who get a higher national diploma, degree or other qualification. What about the people who are further away?

He is usually easy to hear.

I welcome the funding that has been provided by the Scottish Government—both the £30 million that was announced previously and the additional £15 million. The fact that we have a dedicated Minister for Youth Employment also brings real focus to the subject. As we look to the budget for 2013-14, we are getting a positive reaction for switching resources from revenue to capital spend. However, there is a limit to how much of that we can do without impacting on day-to-day revenue spending. It is not easy to get that balance right, and the Finance Committee will look at that in detail in the coming months. Although the level of borrowing has been too high in the past and is a major cause of our current problems, many academics are now arguing that some capital expenditure in the short term would boost jobs and growth. That is still in the hands of the UK Government, and either it needs to move in that direction itself or it needs to give this country the powers to do so. As we have heard, the Finance Committee has been carrying out a study into employability and its report is due at the end of November, after which we will probably have another debate. On Friday, the committee held useful workshops in Ardrossan and Dundee, and I was privileged to attend one in Dumfries with Elaine Murray and others. That was hugely informative for me, as I am more used to the urban environment and the problems and challenges that we face there. It was useful to hear of the particular challenges that people face in more rural areas and to meet public, private and third sector representatives as well as some folk who are seeking employment. Issues such as transport are often specific to rural areas, and we heard of the need for a training centre for the hospitality sector which is specific to Dumfries and Galloway. Other issues, however, are relevant for the whole of Scotland. For example, it is important that people train for the right jobs. We hear about the need for engineers in the North Sea oil sector and other parts of the energy sector. I am not sure that I agree with the thrust of Alex Johnstone’s argument that the issue is mobility, because there seems to be a national shortage of engineers and people with related skills. We now have some North Sea engineering companies coming to Glasgow, but they still find a skills shortage. We need to encourage young people to go in that direction. As a country, we seem to value engineers slightly less highly than they are valued elsewhere, so perhaps we need to change that attitude. Hospitality and tourism are hugely important both in a city such as Glasgow and in a more rural area such as Dumfries and Galloway. There can be an assumption that there are few opportunities for career progression in the hospitality sector, but we have heard repeatedly that there are good opportunities and that people can get to the top of large businesses in that sector. On schools, on Friday we were given an explanation of the difference between soft skills and core skills. I know that the minister prefers core skills. However, communication skills, for example, are really important whether in the retail sector or in restaurants. Another point that came up on Friday—which has been mentioned and on which I agree with Elaine Murray—is that the private sector feels that it is not being properly included by the public sector. However, we were impressed by how well the public sector is working in itself. The Finance Committee has considered the issue of young people who are far from the labour market. The comment by some employers that there is core of such young people who are virtually unemployable has been widely publicised. That was overstated in the media, but the reality is that some folk need extra support. We, as a society, owe them that. I strongly believe that every person in our society has something to offer. Society gains if everybody contributes, and every individual has the right to feel fulfilled. Of course, for some people employment is not the right route to personal fulfilment; for a youngster who has grown up in a household where nobody works, it will often take more than 26 weeks for them to be able to stand on their own two feet in the workplace. We also have many disabled people who really want to work and contribute to society. Some can cope in a mainstream environment with a bit of support, but others need greater support. That is why it is disappointing that Remploy facilities are being closed. I think very highly of Royal Strathclyde Blindcraft Industries, in Glasgow, which has managed to change its product over the years. That organisation and others have a valuable part to play, and I welcome the minister’s statement that there is going to be a review of that. I will conclude by touching on the two amendments. The figure of £124 million is, again, mentioned in the Labour amendment as what Labour is looking for. That leaves us with the question of where that money will come from. The health budget is the biggest budget in the country. Therefore, we can presume that the Labour Party would take the £124 million off that budget. Does that mean that it would charge people to visit their general practitioners and to stay in hospital, as well as having them pay for life-saving medicines? On the Conservative amendment, of course we all support evaluation and audits, as Gavin Brown said. I am an accountant after all, and that is what I like doing, but we know that accountants are criticised for knowing the cost of everything and the value of nothing. There would be certain dangers with putting all the resources into the approaches that are most easily measured. Do we value only college or university qualifications and not help those who are further from work and whom we need to bring closer? The result could be that some of our most vulnerable citizens would be left behind.

Does the member accept that the real people in my constituency, which is one of the neediest in the country, are very positive about no tuition fees, free prescriptions and the freeze in council tax?

I thank all the members who signed the motion to enable the debate to take place. A few years ago, a guy I knew came round to see me late on a Friday night. His partner had been saving up money for a while so that she and the kids could go on holiday—I suspect that they did not do that very often—but he had taken all the money, put it on one horse and lost the lot. He came round to see whether I would lend him the money so that he could put it back before his partner found out. That is the kind of problem that we are here to discuss. Most of us are quite comfortable putting a few pounds on the grand national or another big event. Bingo and raffles, for example, are quite acceptable to most of us these days, and having a little bit of a gamble as part of social activities can be good fun. However, there is a darker side to gambling, when it moves from fun to addiction, as in the case of my friend. The Channel 4 “Dispatches” programme in early August was one of the reasons why I lodged my motion. Professor Jim Orford of the University of Birmingham and Harriet Harman contributed to that programme. As a former minister at Westminster, Harriet Harman commented on the clustering of betting shops following the Gambling Act 2005. Among other things, she said: “If we had known then what we know now, we wouldn’t have allowed this, because it’s not just ruining the High Street it’s ruining people’s lives”. Many of us will remember that, a few years ago, betting shops were much more closed places. Only adults could go into them, and the doors and windows could not be seen through. Nowadays, betting shops are much more transparent and open. In one sense, that appears to be a positive move. If betting is legal, why should it not be out in the open? The other side of the argument is that gambling has been given much more of an air of respectability. In addition, the national lottery has drawn more people into regular grambling than used to be the case. For many, that is no more of a problem than buying chocolate or some other pleasure in life, but for others it has led to addiction problems that were not previously given such an opportunity. We must ask why people gamble. It is a bit of fun for some, but others gamble because their life seems hopeless. They think that if only they could get a big win, it would take the pressure off their life. The topic is therefore linked to the economy, the gap between rich and poor, unemployment and poor wages. Many ordinary people struggle to make ends meet and dream of a magical win that would really change their life. The national lottery has to shoulder some of the blame for that change. We read stories about ordinary people who have won huge sums of money, but we hear less often that those winnings can ruin lives. We are told how many good causes benefit from their share, but it seems that the net effect is to extract more money from poorer areas, where it appears that more tickets are bought. It also appears that more of the good causes tend to be in the richer areas, where there is the expertise to apply for the grants. Professor Orford’s study suggested that there would be around five betting shops for every 100,000 people in the average affluent area. I understand from colleagues in Aberdeenshire West—which is, allegedly, one of those affluent areas—that that is approximately the number of betting shops there. The study also suggested that poorer areas would have around 12 betting shops. That intrigued me, as I had the gut feeling that there were more than 12 betting shops in my constituency, so I thought that I would count them over the summer. My constituency does not even have a population of 100,000—its population is probably more like 70,000. There were 31 betting shops for those 70,000 people. Our constituency also has the largest bingo club in Europe. I am grateful to those who have made an input to the debate, especially Gamblers Anonymous and the Church of Scotland’s church and society council, which gave us comments. Gamblers Anonymous tells us that its membership has increased significantly recently, particularly among young, low-income men who have become addicted to fixed-odds betting terminals. FOBTs, as they are known, were introduced in 2001 and the most common game is roulette. I understand that four machines can make about £2,000 a week, that £123 million is wagered each day in the United Kingdom and that the profit for the gambling companies is some £3.3 million a day. I was struck by a quote that sums up the problem with FOBTs. David Armstrong, a former gambling addict, said: “You lose your sense of money when you’re on the machines - it means nothing. It’s so quick, you’re thinking just one more spin, just one more - until you walk out and you’ve lost it all.” Although we are mainly focusing on bookmakers in today’s debate, I want to mention in passing some other, modern forms of gambling that can be a problem. Smart phones now have applications for folk to gamble, and online gambling via the internet is also a huge issue. In a recent constituency case that I had, a guy had won some £10,000 online and the company, which is well known but is based in Gibraltar, made it difficult for him to withdraw his winnings. Temptation proved too much and he gambled the £10,000 and lost the lot. I am not saying that the individual does not shoulder some of the responsibility, but I question whether the balance between the gambling organisations and the individuals who take part has swung too far in favour of the former. I was somewhat disappointed by some of the things that I read in the briefing that we received from the Association of British Bookmakers. For example, it claims to be part of the retail sector. That is stretching things a bit. Wikipedia’s definition of retail is “the sale of goods and services from individuals or businesses to the end-user.” I do not think that bookies quite fit in there. The association also claims that bookmakers contribute £352 million to the Scottish economy. Come on! If that £352 million was not going to the betting shops, it would still be in the economy. It might be paying for food and heating for families that really need those things. I am conscious that gambling is a reserved matter, but I would be grateful if the minister could comment on a few issues. For example, schools rightly teach pupils about sex, drugs and alcohol, but does the minister agree that schools also have a role in teaching them about the dangers of gambling? Does she agree with Harriet Harman that the Gambling Act 2005 relaxed things too much? Will the minister make representations to the UK Government about possible amendments to the legislation, for as long as it is under Westminster control? Finally, will she press for better regulation of the betting companies, especially those that are based in places such as Gibraltar?

The member mentioned steam. I am just old enough to remember steam on the railways. I also remember when the low level at Glasgow Queen Street station was electrified. Now we have the electrification of the high level, from Queen Street station to Edinburgh. Is not that fantastic news?

I am positive about the improvements that are coming to the main Glasgow to Edinburgh line. We should remember that there are really four lines linking the two cities. Two of those are already electrified, including most recently the line via Airdrie and Bathgate. That line starts in Helensburgh or Milngavie and runs through Glasgow Queen Street low level and the east end of Glasgow, directly to Edinburgh. There are four trains an hour and it is not as busy as the Queen Street high-level trains. It is the route that I use every day and I am grateful to the Government for putting it in place. In fact, that improvement has been much welcomed throughout the east end of Glasgow. If members look at my Facebook page, they will see a photograph of me on the first train in 2010. It is positive that Dalmarnock station is being given a major upgrade in preparation for the Commonwealth games; I come past it regularly and it is coming along very well. Longer term, it will leave a legacy, after the Commonwealth games, for getting to the velodrome, the indoor sports arena and Celtic park. There are improvements on a much grander scale at Waverley station, which a number of us use regularly. Although those are taking some time, we can already see a greatly improved station coming along. Going back to Queen Street station, it is clear that the high-level link via Falkirk offers the fastest and most popular route to Edinburgh. Anyone who goes into Queen Street station can see that the major constraint is the shortness of the platforms in comparison with those in Glasgow Central, with any other major terminus in Scotland and probably with most rail stations throughout Europe. Queen Street station has incredibly short platforms. Rather than running more and more trains, it is clearly desirable to run longer trains with greater capacity, which is what happens in most European countries. I have sometimes wondered whether we could extend the platforms northwards into the hill, but I have always assumed that that would be horribly expensive and virtually impossible. It seems that a solution has now been found, which would involve demolishing part of the Millennium hotel extension and extending the platforms south towards George Square. If that solution is feasible, it is very much to be welcomed. When it comes to expanding and improving the rail network, I can have as many dreams as the next person. There are still a few more speeches to come, and I am sure that many members will give us their wish lists of what they would like to do with the rail system in this country.

Over the past four or five years, we have seen a higher proportion of the SNP’s manifesto being delivered than we saw of the manifesto of the previous Administration under Labour. We all have dreams, we all have visions and we all want things to happen. One of my visions is of a metro line under Glasgow that would link Glasgow royal infirmary, Queen Street station, Glasgow Central and the Southern general hospital. That would be a fantastic link for people, but such a line is a long, long way ahead. We must live in the real world—Labour must learn to do that, too. Money is tight and we cannot spend as profligately as Gordon Brown did. We must be realistic about our money and our choices. Choices have to be made, and I completely accept that work should be done in phases. We want pretty much all of the Scottish rail network to be electrified—I hope that none of us will be satisfied until that happens—but it will not be done in one fell swoop. If the minister would like one little suggestion from me on something that we could do on the rail network, it would be to electrify the 1.8 miles of line across central Glasgow that links the electrified lines north and south of the Clyde. Currently, empty electric trains have to be shunted across the river, which I suspect is not a great idea. Regardless of all the wish lists that members might have, none of that should detract from the tremendous good news that we are hearing. Electrification of the Glasgow to Edinburgh line has been a dream that many of us thought would never happen. It is tremendous that it is now coming.

I wonder whether Hanzala Malik remembers that when he and I were councillors in Glasgow, the Post Office building in George Square sat empty. That was a blight on the city, and that is the type of problem that needs to be addressed.

It is clear that the budget bill will be the main piece of legislation this year that can have the biggest impact on the economy. Last year’s move in relation to capital expenditure and preventative spending was welcome, and I look forward to similar positive moves this year. One challenge that we face is that of tackling the problems that many people face and taking a long-term view—I presume that that is why the word “sustainable” appears in the motion’s title and has been in many speeches. Unemployment is one of the key challenges, especially for young people. It is easy to stand in the chamber and demand more jobs or more spending in one area, but we must be told where such money would come from. If more was to be spent in one area, I presume that less would be spent somewhere else. I disagree categorically with Helen Eadie’s suggestion that former coalfields should somehow trump other areas that have a greater need. The Government’s funding should be targeted at those who are in greatest need and should not be ring fenced purely for ex-coalfields. The picture in relation to unemployment is quite complex. Over the summer, I visited a number of local businesses, including at least two engineering companies, and yesterday I met Glasgow Chamber of Commerce. A common theme from those organisations, which touches on the speech that we just heard from Kezia Dugdale, was the shortage of applicants—of graduates and others—for engineering-related jobs. Scottish Power also raised that at a youth employment event that we had in Glasgow before the summer, which Angela Constance attended. How are we to tackle that issue? Do schools always do enough to encourage young people into engineering? On Friday, I was encouraged to hear at one school—where Jackson Carlaw and I were members of a panel—that the headteacher felt that pupils were considering engineering more seriously as a career option. In the past, engineering has sometimes been the poor relation of professions such as medicine and law. Given our needs—there is a huge need for engineering expertise in the North Sea, not to mention the needs that are coming up for the renewables sector—we must ensure that enough engineers are trained. We in the Finance Committee have heard a lot about young people who are far from the workplace. Even if jobs are available, not all young people are engaged and involved enough to take up the opportunities. Often, it is not easy for someone to get into a job when, perhaps because of their family background, they have known few people who go out to work every day. Changing attitudes can take a serious amount of input. However, if we invest in such individuals, not just the individual or their family but the whole of our society benefits. If everyone contributes what they can, the whole of society benefits. It is important to continue to invest in that way. Linked to that point is something that has not been mentioned much today. Of course we want all our current population to be fully engaged in growing the economy, but we have a problem if the population does not grow much. If the population does not grow, it is difficult to grow the economy and the tax base and to improve public services. In recent years, there have been encouraging signs that Scotland’s population has been stabilising and even growing. We need to do more to encourage that. However, one failure of the union since 1707 has been the decline in Scotland’s population relative to England’s population. In 1700, we had about 1.25 million people compared to England’s population of 5 million—a ratio of 1:4. Now, we are talking about a population of 5 million compared to England’s 50 million—a ratio of 1:10. In that regard at least, the union has not been a success. It was encouraging to visit businesses in my constituency over the summer. Some are tremendous—often small businesses that are working away. Some are leaders in their field and export all over the world, although they may not get a lot of public recognition. Some of the strongest firms in my constituency are family-owned or privately owned firms. They may not have grown as fast as a plc, but they have grown at a pace that they could handle. They have kept debt at a reasonable level and, in difficult times, they are less vulnerable. If we are serious about sustainable economic growth, we need to question the assumption that to be a success a company must be quoted on the stock market. Although that can lead to faster short-term growth, that may not be the best thing in the long term. I conclude by touching on the need “for all of Scotland to flourish”, which is mentioned in the motion. We hear frequently quoted the fact that the UK is one of the most unequal societies in the world and that it has become more unequal in recent decades. The idea that a small number of people get richer and richer, paying less and less in taxes, and that those taxes build more and more prisons in which we put people whom we do not like—I believe that that is a brief summary of Tory policy—is not sustainable. I welcome the suggestion that one of our new taxes, the replacement for stamp duty, will be more progressive than what we currently have, and I hope that that will continue to be the pattern as we take more control over our taxation system. I welcome economic growth, but it needs to benefit everyone and not just the few, as has happened in the past.

Will the member give way?

Clearly, the starting point is that we have empty houses and business premises that are sitting unused, while at the same time we have individuals and families going homeless and businesses unable to get hold of affordable properties. Something is inherently wrong. The market is not working and the challenge is how to get more empty properties into use. No one is saying that there is an easy answer to the problem. The Government is taking on board the suggestions that have been made, but if some members oppose the proposals I hope that they will tell us their alternatives. I will touch on council tax relief. On the housing front we have a clear shortage of several types of housing in the east end of Glasgow. Over the years I have twice seen flats in the close where I live sitting empty for more than a year. There can be a variety of reasons for that and it has been suggested that we need to do more studies on the subject. However, the fact remains that some owners may let matters drift and the lack of an incentive of escaping council tax might encourage them to sell. I like the fact that the proposed measure empowers local government. Under the previous Administration at Holyrood, there was a repeated tendency to centralise, whereas under our Administration ring fencing has been largely ended and moves such as the proposal on council tax strengthen the power of local government. I particularly like the idea that different areas can be treated differently by one council. Despite what some members may think, Glasgow is a very varied city. The east and the west of the city are quite different, face different challenges and require different solutions. Non-domestic rates on commercial and retail properties are likely to be more of an issue of debate. The nature of that issue when property prices are rising is different from its nature when property prices are falling. An example of the issue that exists when prices are rising was the old Post Office building in George Square, which members may be familiar with. While I was a councillor, it sat empty for several years and was used, basically, as an advertising hoarding. Members may remember the huge advert that appeared facing George Square. When Glasgow City Council got totally fed up with the owner, the only real power that it had was the ability to stop the advertising. A power such as the one that is proposed in the bill is exactly what is needed to bring properties such as that one, which blighted the city centre for so long, back into use. Any move to encourage property owners to bring properties into use is to be welcomed, especially before property prices start rising again, as we hope they will. The Finance Committee spent a fair bit of time on the financial memorandum to the bill, and its report runs to some 45 pages. It is worth saying that the work was carried out in May, and some of the points that were raised then have already been dealt with by the lead committee or by the Government. I note that in paragraph 187 of its report the Local Government and Regeneration Committee noted that the Finance Committee had to do a fair bit of digging to get the detail, but I think that the points that were made have now largely been resolved. The Finance Committee’s report was robust, as Margaret Mitchell agreed. It represents a good example of a parliamentary committee being prepared to question and challenge Government in the areas in which it is not satisfied. We took evidence from a number of bodies, including the Business Centre Association and the Scottish Property Federation. Comparisons were made with the experience in England in recent years, but the evidence tended to be rather weak. For example, it was noted that retail vacancy rates in England rose from 3 per cent in 2007 to 14 per cent in 2011, but it was not possible to say to what extent that was a result of the recession and to what extent it was linked to the empty property relief changes. No evidence was produced on that. It is possible that vacancy rates would have been even higher than 14 per cent but for the changes that were introduced. In that regard, our proposed system is much more generous to businesses than the one in England. Despite what Margaret Mitchell said, I believe that the Conservative Government has no plans to change the system there.

I am about to move on to that; I stand by the Finance Committee’s report, which has been widely accepted to be robust. On consultation, the committee struggled to understand why there was more detailed consultation on the council tax proposals than on the non-domestic rates provisions. We accepted that some consultation on the issue was included as part of the budget process consultation, but it was somewhat swamped by other budget issues and might have benefited from being highlighted more in its own right. I am glad to see that that point was taken on board by the lead committee in paragraphs 114 to 120 of its report. I certainly accept that the non-domestic rates proposals have since been debated robustly by the lead committee and the Finance Committee, so we are probably now in the same position that we would have been in had there been consultation at an earlier stage. Mr McMahon raised the issue of the failure to carry out a BRIA. We spent a fair bit of time considering whether a BRIA was required. The committee accepted that £18 million was not a huge amount in the bigger scheme of things, but our understanding was that, according to Government guidance, a BRIA is required even for a measure that has a small impact, in which case the scale of the BRIA is reduced accordingly. I am grateful to the lead committee for taking that point seriously. I reread its report this morning, and it is clear from paragraphs 121 to 130 that it pressed the minister on it. The committee reaches a fair conclusion in paragraph 130: “The Committee welcomes the Minister’s commitment stated above to explore and refine the policy and to listen to the Committee and to stakeholders. ... The Committee therefore urges the Scottish Government to continue the dialogue with business organisations and other stakeholders as the policy develops.” That seems fair to me.

I think that the Finance Committee had comments from organisations representing both small and large businesses. The point that we are making here is that, although a lot of us would have liked more consultation at an earlier stage, consultation has now effectively happened because there has been so much coverage of the issue. I am convinced that the minister is still listening as we move forward.

I take on board absolutely what Kevin Stewart says. We are still at an early stage with the bill. The Government has made it very clear that it has listened and is listening to business and other stakeholders. I am therefore happy to support the bill.

I agree with Nigel Don that the effects are place specific. Does he agree that one possibility is that people who own shop units below tenement buildings, which certainly happens in my constituency, might, because their minds are being focused as he describes, consider switching the use of that property from a shop to a flat?

I really must start my speech today by welcoming the planned bill on the referendum. The constitution is central to everything else that we do, which is where the previous speaker slightly missed the point. If we have the constitution right, we can have fairer and more progressive taxes and an end to nuclear weapons. We can stop being involved in illegal foreign wars, we can use real resources to create jobs and tackle poverty, and we can raise the statutory minimum wage. All of those changes depend on a better constitutional settlement. Nowhere is that more obvious than in the budget. We need to have a separate budget for this country. The range of options that we would then have is huge, including welfare reform, which we can only tinker with at the moment, and capital expenditure, which is far too restricted by Westminster. If we are serious about redistributing income and wealth, we need the full range of taxes. I welcome many other parts of the Government’s programme. I will touch on the Commonwealth games, which particularly relates to my constituency. I very much welcome the preparedness to amend legislation, if necessary, following on from lessons from the London Olympics. Although the Olympics appeared to have been a great success, there is always room for improvement. Transport issues might be considered.

I find personally distasteful the idea that people could use only one product in a certain place and that there was quite a lot of restriction about gathering and so on. On the issue of products, there is a local brewery in my constituency whose product I would like to see on sale—not just the products of one huge multinational. On tax bills, we welcome the setting up of revenue Scotland and the fact that it will work closely with the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Registers of Scotland. Many people are not happy with Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs and feel that it is unnecessarily bureaucratic and expensive. Surely one of the advantages of being a small country is that we can be less bureaucratic and have simpler systems that are friendlier for the user. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland and others have helped us to think about what kind of tax system Scotland would want. We will look particularly at the land and buildings transaction tax—and the encouraging signs that it will be a more progressive tax—and the landfill tax, which will largely be like for like and revenue neutral but will still be an important piece of legislation if we are serious about reusing materials and preventing and recycling waste. An area that has not been given much coverage so far is same-sex marriage. It is a topic that has provoked more interest among the public than some of our other deliberations in this place. The wide range of views—often strongly held—among the public at large is not fully reflected in the Parliament. It seems that all the party leaders, and possibly a majority in each party, support the introduction of same-sex marriage, whereas among constituents there is much more of a balance on both sides. First, I welcome assurances that there will be a free vote on the matter, which will apply to front-bench and back-bench MSPs. I hope that the Presiding Officer and her colleagues will enable debate within the chamber, as it would seem to me to be a failure of the Parliament if the public were debating a subject and we were not to debate it properly. Secondly, I seem to hold a minority view on this subject, at least within this chamber. The subject touches on a range of issues, including the relationship between church and state, which has been a thorny issue in Scotland for hundreds of years and in other countries for perhaps even longer. There may be elements in the church who want a close constitutional relationship between church and state, but that is not my desire—I want a clear separation between church and state. In many ways, we are heading towards a healthier relationship between the two than we have sometimes had in the past. Although I am clear that God’s teaching in the Bible does not support two people of the same sex having a sexual relationship, it is not my aim to try to force Christian values on wider society against its will. I believe that God’s way is the best way for all of us, but God also gives us free choice to follow his way or not. Therefore, if same-sex marriage is introduced, the key question for me will continue to be: will freedom of speech and freedom of religion be maintained? Will the churches and others be allowed to opt out? I welcome the assurances on that from Government ministers and from various pressure groups who have been involved in the subject, but it remains to be seen whether and how that can be delivered. There is legal opinion in the public domain that Westminster is unable to protect the churches from a challenge in the European Court of Human Rights if same-sex marriage is permitted. I hope that we can debate that issue and look at it in more detail. Therefore, I look forward to seeing the proposed bill—especially to seeing how those who disagree with the legislation will be allowed to follow their own beliefs. In conclusion, I believe that we have a programme to be proud of. I foresee quite a lot of work for the Finance Committee, but I am sure that we are all up for that—our workaholic convener, Mr Gibson, will certainly keep us on our toes.

Will the member give way?

I congratulate the Government on being 0.3 per cent within budget. I wish that I had been able to achieve that at any point in my working life. Danny Alexander and Alistair Darling have suggested that Scotland’s capital budget has perhaps increased, but I understood that it was cut by £600 million between 2010-11 and 2011-12. Can the cabinet secretary clarify the matter?

Am I right in understanding that the Scotland Act 1998 says that, if we were to do something that would impose extra costs on the Treasury, we would have to refund that money to the Treasury and that, therefore, logically, if we do something that benefits the Treasury, it should refund us?

The member makes an important point about Scottish products being available in our hotels. I have sometimes been in hotels in which there has been a disappointing lack of Scottish real ales.

Does the member accept that the comments on websites are not always entirely objective and that one bad experience can be overstated?

Given the gap in our society between the rich and the poor, I welcome the cabinet secretary’s proposal to move to a more progressive tax regime. Does he agree that if we had full powers over taxation the Scottish Parliament could do a lot more to ensure that the heaviest tax burden does not fall on those least able to bear it?

I thank the Presiding Officer for the opportunity to have this debate. The subject is the death penalty in India and, specifically, the sentence on Balwant Singh Rajoana. At the outset, I make a clear distinction. Violence and other criminal activity is not acceptable and I in no way condone it. However, there is a separate question as to what sentences are acceptable in a civilised country. I will argue this evening that the death penalty is not acceptable whatever the crime. I clarify that I am not in any way singling out India concerning the subject. I and others would be equally critical of the United States or China. India is a sovereign country and has the right to make her own decisions. I have visited India only briefly, but what I saw hugely impressed me. I lived in neighbouring Nepal for some years, and I think that we in the west have much to learn from south Asia, not least about how family members look after one another and the fact that having older relatives is seen as a privilege and not as a burden. We do not in any way try to speak down to India, which can sometimes be a criticism of countries such as ours with a sad imperial past. India has a much longer and more impressive history than ours. Instead, we want to appeal to India, almost as a younger brother, to consider this particular outcome of its legal system. We focus not just on a particular country, but on a particular individual who has been sentenced to death. Balwant Singh Rajoana is a Sikh—that is, a member of a minority community in India. In 1995, he is said to have witnessed the mass murder of many Sikhs ordered by the Chief Minister of Punjab, Beant Singh. In 2007, Balwant Singh was convicted for the assassination in 1995 of that same Chief Minister Beant Singh. I am not here to condone revenge, although that is a reaction that many of us might have under such circumstances, but I am here to question the use of the death penalty, which only continues the cycle of violence and revenge rather than seeking to break it. Sikhs themselves oppose the use of the death penalty, and I understand that the family of Beant Singh would not oppose a pardon. At this stage, I thank members from various parties for supporting my motion, which helped to secure this evening’s debate. I also thank Scotland’s Sikh community, some of whom are present in the public gallery, for highlighting the issue, especially by demonstrating outside the Parliament in March. Scotland and Britain have carried out many barbaric acts over the years and the death penalty was finally abolished here only in 1998, although it ceased to be available for murder in 1965. We are not innocents, but that is not an excuse for us to say nothing on the issue. Other countries can rightly criticise Scotland when we get things wrong, and we have the right to comment on other countries’ practices. We all gain from being in the family of nations and from mutual constructive criticism. One of my hopes for Scotland, whether within the United Kingdom or not, is that we have a strong record in standing up for human rights. I hope that we can agree on that point tonight. I pay tribute to Amnesty International for its briefing for this evening’s debate, and, more important, for its tireless campaigning against the death penalty and all other human rights abuses. In its briefing, Amnesty points out that, across the world, most countries are moving away from the death penalty. When Amnesty started campaigning against it in 1977, only 16 countries had abolished it, but today 141 countries are abolitionist in law or in practice. China, Iran, North Korea, Yemen and the United States carried out the most executions in 2011. Excluding China, which is believed to have carried out more than the rest of the world put together, there were 676 known executions worldwide, up from 527 in 2010. There are many reasons for not having the death penalty. I expect that members will mention a variety of those, but I will highlight a few. All judicial systems make mistakes at times, but the death penalty is irrevocable. Members of minority communities tend to be the victims of the death penalty more than others. Poorer people and those with mental health problems are also often sufferers—we know that such groups often populate our prisons in this country. Furthermore, the death penalty has not proved to be a deterrent to violence in this or other countries. I believe that as members of a civilised society we should rise above what has been done to us and should even treat criminals with mercy, while not undermining justice. To focus again on India, for seven successive years no executions have taken place. However, in 2011, 110 people were sentenced to death and mercy petitions to the president have been rejected. There is a fear that the death penalty could be reintroduced. Apart from anything else, a prolonged stay on death row has to be considered a form of torture. The world’s longest-serving death-row inmate is believed to be Japanese. He has been there for 44 years and suffers from a mental illness as a result. How can that be right? On 2 April I wrote to the Foreign Secretary, William Hague, to ask about the United Kingdom Government’s position on the death penalty, both in India and across the rest of the world. I received a response from Jeremy Browne MP, who is a minister of state in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, dated 3 May. I thought that it was a reasonable response. He detailed the work that the UK Government has done on the matter, specifically raising the case of Balwant Singh Rajoana and the wider issue of the death penalty in India. The UK Government has raised the matter both bilaterally with India and through the European Union. Among the other things that he says in his letter, he states: “It is the longstanding policy of successive British Governments to strongly oppose the death penalty in all circumstances as a matter of principle. We regularly make our position clear to the Indian Government”. I welcome that. Turning to home, I ask the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs whether any representations have been or can be made by the Scottish Government in respect of this case or more generally about India’s plans to perhaps reintroduce capital punishment. Perhaps she can clarify the Scottish Government’s policy on engaging with India. I invite the cabinet secretary to put on the public record the Scottish Government’s opposition to the death penalty. Will she also make representations to the Foreign Office on behalf of this Parliament? Wrongly imprisoning someone is one thing, as they can potentially be released and compensated, but ending their life is final: there is no going back. I conclude by quoting Desmond Tutu. He said: “To take a life when a life has been lost is revenge, it is not justice.”

I welcome the statement and the emphasis on vulnerable groups, including people with severe disabilities and terminally ill people, and on carers. Can the cabinet secretary give an estimate of how much carers are currently helped and will be helped under the new measures?

The member makes the interesting point that, at Westminster, statements are perhaps produced more quickly and more often. However, does he accept that there is a tension here? On a Monday, the House of Commons starts at half past two and goes on until 10 o’clock at night, so it has a lot more time to play with. Taking an hour or 40 minutes out of a debate is therefore not as serious as it is for us.

Does the member accept that there is flexibility to allow committees to sit for longer? For example, the Scotland Bill Committee, which was convened by Linda Fabiani, sat for extended periods while the Parliament was sitting and in the evenings, because permission was given.

I will respond to the previous speech by saying that structures are important, and I support these reforms, but what we do with structures is important, too. I do not believe that there is a perfect structure. The challenge to us is to do with how we use the existing and future structures. I am a fairly new member, but I have had the opportunity of seeing how other places work. I support the proposed reforms. Meeting in the chamber three days a week makes sense. The constituents might want to see us in the constituencies, but I have constituents who feel that the real work that I am doing is done in the Parliament, and they are always asking how long I am here for and what I do while I am here. The idea of having more members’ business debates is also good, and I suggest that more of us need to sign the motions of members of other parties in order to encourage a wider range of subjects for debate. I also welcome topical questions. If there are disadvantages to the proposals, they are to do with the curtailment of time in the constituency. However, we need to strike a balance. Under the Scotland Act 2012 we are getting more powers and that will require more time in the Parliament. I will make a few comparisons with Westminster—I realise that some people do not like us making comparisons with Westminster and that, if I say anything good about the place, some of my colleagues will probably shout me down, but I think that we compare well with Westminster. We are more transparent, in that it is easier to tell who is getting to speak, when and for how long. We are fairer, in that it is not those who are the longest serving who get to speak the longest. Our voting system is more sensible, in that we do not have to go through lobbies and be counted through doors. Further, making even the changes that we are discussing today would be hugely unlikely at Westminster, where there is enormous resistance to any change at all. We must, however, be realistic. There are 129 members here, whereas down south there are more than 600 members. That allows Westminster to do things that we probably cannot do, such as regularly have committees meet at the same time as the chamber. The downside is that members of Parliament can hide in the House of Commons, which I suggest is much harder for us. I find the time here more pressurised than it was down there. I was in London for four days a week with no chance of getting back to my constituency through the week, although many of us here can obviously go back to our constituencies in the evenings. The point has been made that we have more time to meet civic Scotland, be it charities, national groups or whatever. The introduction of the new system should mean that activities that have taken place on a crammed Wednesday evening and Wednesday and Thursday lunch times can also take place on Tuesdays. Some ideas are not being taken forward and it will be good if those can be looked at again in the future. I support the idea of encouraging interventions. It is noticeable that some members do not take interventions, although I am grateful to all those who have taken interventions from me during the debate. We need to have sympathy for members who do not like taking interventions, but the public enjoy and appreciate interventions. One idea, which comes from down south, is that at Westminster an extra two minutes are sometimes allowed for a speech if a member takes an intervention. The issue of published questions from party leaders, especially at First Minister’s question time, has been commented on. It strikes the public and newcomers such as myself as a bit odd that the same question is repeated by the same person week after week. I accept that there are reasons for that and that it allows a width of supplementary questions, but that is perhaps another practice that could be revised. I am happy to support the motion. There are wider questions in all this about the good of democracy as a whole. There is a low turnout at many elections and the public clearly wants politics to be done better. Although most of us are in parties and tend to put the party at the top of our agenda, we must balance that commitment with our responsibility for the good of the whole Parliament and our duty to strengthen democracy itself.

4. To ask the Scottish Government whether schools in close proximity to Commonwealth games venues will undergo refurbishment before 2014. (S4O-01072)

I completely agree that primary school buildings are the responsibility of, in my case, Glasgow City Council. The teachers and education within the schools are generally of an excellent standard. However, does the minister agree that it is disappointing that primary schools such as St Michael’s primary, Wellshot primary and St Anne’s primary, which are close to Commonwealth games sites, are in very poor condition? Has the minister been given any indication by Glasgow’s Labour council whether it will deliver its election promise of refurbishing such schools before the games?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that point?

I understand the word “patriotic” to mean putting your country ahead of any other. Would the member put Britain ahead of Scotland if there was a choice?

Will the member take an intervention on that point?

I could have intervened on that last point. If Elaine Murray and others do not think that the constitution is important, they should think a bit more about history and the future. We are having this debate because the constitution is important and Labour members should welcome the fact that we can have such a debate. I argue that people in England could have the debate as well, because they have their own Parliament, but perhaps it is slightly different for them. Even though they keep saying it, I do not believe that those members really believe that the constitution is unimportant. The scope of what we can do in the bill is limited, as is the extent to which we can mitigate the effects of the UK act. Anything that we can do to simplify the system is to be welcomed. It has been made clear this afternoon that the first problem that we have all faced has been the timescale. Some members have said that things have been a little bit rushed, but the Government and the Parliament have had very little choice about how quickly to make the legislation. As has been said, we must do all that we can to protect vulnerable people and, sadly, that might sometimes mean that not all the t’s are crossed and not all the i’s are dotted. A further problem is the lack of information that we have had from Westminster. It likes to think that it sets the standard for parliaments everywhere, but the standard has been pretty poor in this case. I specifically want to talk about the social fund and crisis loans, and I welcome Nicola Sturgeon’s comments about working with COSLA in that regard. I know that she wanted to intervene earlier and, if she wants to, I am happy to let her intervene on that point.

I certainly welcome that intervention. The question of the social fund and crisis loans underlines our present position. We do not have the powers to do all the things that we would like to do. If we look beyond whether a loan is enough or not, or if the loans are even available, how can we expect people who are on a miserable level of benefits to pay back a loan? There is something fundamentally wrong with giving people on such a level of income a loan when they should be getting a grant, but it is clearly beyond our budget and ability to do that in the short term. We have inherited that system and we have to do our best with it. The Finance Committee looked at the financial memorandum of the bill and I will refer to one or two things from what was perhaps one of the more frustrating meetings that the Finance Committee has had. The convener started off the questions by asking: “How much is the fact that you are operating almost in a vacuum hampering your work?”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 18 April 2012; c 965.] That was the theme of the discussion after that. We touched on a number of issues, including COSLA’s point that local authorities will have to work with a double system for some time. COSLA wrote: “since most claimants will only gradually move on to new benefits between 2013 and 2017, parallel systems of entitlement will need to operate during the transition period”. That will cause problems for local authorities. Glasgow City Council raised the question whether the DWP, the Scottish Government and local authorities will be able to share data with one another. We await an answer on that. Elaine Murray touched on the issue of consultation with Westminster. To an extent, things were summed up when Mark McDonald said to the bill team: “You talked about the speed at which the legislation is being put through, but it does not seem to be matched by the speed at which information is being trickled down to the devolved Administrations.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 18 April 2012; c 974.] I think that all the committee members felt that.

Yes, I share that frustration. We still do not know whether Westminster ministers thought through the legislation or whether they were doing it on the hoof and rushing it. The Finance Committee concluded that subordinate legislation should be accompanied by information on the likely financial implications of each instrument. The best quote on that is from a letter from our esteemed convener, Kenneth Gibson, which states: “It would be helpful to our future scrutiny if the lead committee could seek clarification from the Cabinet Secretary on the timing, nature and level of detail of the financial information that will be provided by the Scottish Government alongside its subordinate legislation and the format in which it will be provided.” We have had a lot of good input from third sector organisations. For example, the Child Poverty Action Group said: “In the face of damaging UK welfare policies CPAG therefore urges the Scottish Parliament to ensure that devolved powers are used, in the face of UK cuts, to protect, and where possible enhance, the support available to low income families both in and out of work.” We all agree with that, but the problem is that we are living with limited means. We have to live within the budget that we are given. We would like to expand things, but the budget is being cut. Nicola Sturgeon mentioned fairness and compassion. I could spend longer on the principles, but I do not have time. Let us remember that the Welfare Reform Act 2012 is the latest harsh welfare reform legislation after the previous harsh Welfare Reform Act 2009, which came in under Labour and James Purnell. I hope that, before too long, we will be able to make the real decisions here, and that we will make better ones.

A number of fathers have been in touch with me about that. Does Nanette Milne agree that the courts seem to start from the position that the mother should have the main contact and the father must argue for every inch?

Where would the money that the member wants to put into colleges and housing come from?

Today, we are focusing on growth and we have heard of the many positive actions that the Government has been taking. Scottish Government policies have been very focused on growth and jobs, and, across the chamber, we all welcome that. Nevertheless, it is right to say that unemployment is too high, especially among young people, women and older people and in certain locations. As we have just heard from Paul Wheelhouse, the Finance Committee had a very positive session yesterday at which we heard from three witnesses who were extremely optimistic and had a lot of good news to tell us about what is happening out there. Dr Lena Wilson from Scottish Enterprise spoke about targeting growth companies in, for example, South America, where Scottish Enterprise is developing offices. It strikes me that one of the real advantages of our leaving the UK would be that we would probably have a much better relationship with South America, as the UK is viewed with a considerable amount of suspicion there at this time. We heard from Professor Jim McDonald of the University of Strathclyde, who spoke of the high regard in which Scottish universities are held around the world, especially in subjects such as engineering, where there are generally more jobs available than in other sectors. One of the disadvantages of our being in the UK was highlighted: the UK Government and the Borders Agency are doing their best to restrict the number of students who come here, despite the fact that we both earn money and gain friends around the world through their being here. We also heard from Philip Grant of Lloyds Bank, who is widely quoted in the media today. He pointed out that Scotland’s raised international profile can be a huge advantage for trade and exports and that a larger share of the bank’s employees are in Scotland than the size of the population would merit. At a more local level, the east end of Glasgow and I are seeing investment in the Commonwealth games. After the games, the village will become social housing and a care home as well as private housing. There are also new sports facilities, Dalmarnock rail station and the east end regeneration route, which is opening up the east end for businesses and jobs. A lot of positive things are happening. It is true that we cannot always choose our priorities for capital expenditure. Among my priorities for Glasgow would certainly be housing, which has been mentioned, and primary schools, which have been sadly neglected by Glasgow City Council over many years. However, the reality is that we are sometimes forced to invest in areas that would not be our first choice. One of those is the Forth road bridge. As I have said previously, I remember the existing bridge being built. It is a huge disappointment to us all that we are having to replace it at this time. In no way could the decision to replace the bridge be called a populist one; it is being replaced because that is right and necessary. Everybody I meet, including in Glasgow, accepts that, but nobody would have wanted the project to happen. That gives the lie to the idea that the Government follows populist policies. We need to consider procurement, which Malcolm Chisholm mentioned. The Finance Committee received good evidence on that from Jim and Margaret Cuthbert, who said that we could learn from other countries about breaking down contracts into smaller chunks so that SMEs and smaller organisations could take them on more readily. Another project in which we have been forced to invest but which would not be a top choice is the Edinburgh trams. That is down to the crazy decisions of other groups, some members of which might be present today. As far as I am concerned, the money would have been better spent on housing. To be fair to Gavin Brown, he told us how he would fund some of the things that he would like, such as housing and colleges, by selling off Scottish Water. My assumption is that, despite Labour’s movement on a variety of policy areas, it does not support selling off Scottish Water. Therefore, we are interested to hear from Labour about where the cuts would be made to pay for housing and colleges. My assumption is that the cuts would be to the health sector, because Labour members have not mentioned that. We need to know what growth—if we have it—will lead to. The briefing for the debate from the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations states: “for us, the economy is about much more than growth”. It continues: “At a time of austerity, growth is important, but growth should be a means towards supporting people and making their communities sustainable. Growth is not the end in itself. We need to make the economy more sustainable and meaningful to people and their communities.” We do not have any Green members with us today, but I am sure that, if we did, they would say that growth does not stand alone and must be tied in with the environment and sustainability. We have received evidence from several bodies, including the Poverty Alliance, that growth must be inclusive. Growth can be a bad thing if it is overreliant on short-term debt or if it comes at the cost of damaging the environment or developing countries. The benefits of growth must be shared fairly. The recent Sunday Times rich list shows the increasing gap between rich and poor, which has happened under Labour and the Tories at Westminster. Tax for the wealthy has been reduced—sometimes they do not even pay much tax at all—while those at the bottom have their wages frozen and their pension contributions increased. Many of us are supportive of the reasons behind today’s strike over pensions by some in the public sector. If the cuts were 1 per cent for those at the bottom, 5 per cent for those in the middle and 10 per cent for those at the top, we might accept that, but it seems that ordinary people are the ones who are suffering.

Will the member give way on that point?

I welcome the opportunity to close this debate on fiscal sustainability. In the convener’s opening remarks, he referred to the stimulating contributions that were made during the committee’s round-table discussions. We have had some stimulating speeches this afternoon, but before I respond to some points that have been made, I will outline some of the committee’s work for the coming months. The Finance Committee has developed a coherent and relevant work programme, with the bulk of our work sitting under the broad theme of fiscal sustainability. There are clear and useful linkages between the various work strands, all of which are focused on the annual budget scrutiny to which the cabinet secretary referred. We will continue to identify, listen to and work with key individuals and groups who can focus our scrutiny on fiscal issues. As the convener said, our work with the David Hume Institute has been extremely useful and we look forward to further discussions with its members in the coming months. We will shortly hold a series of round-table discussions on employment and employability. As has been mentioned, this morning we took evidence from Dr Lena Wilson of Scottish Enterprise, Professor Jim McDonald of the University of Strathclyde and Philip Grant, following their recent articles in The Scotsman on increasing sustainable economic growth. During the debate, it has been asked whether we should be completely pessimistic and pulling our hair out, or be more optimistic. This morning’s panel, who came from various fields, was incredibly optimistic. Our future round-table discussions on the topic will hear evidence from businesses, business groups and the Minister for Youth Employment. We have taken evidence from the Institute for Fiscal Studies and the Office for Budget Responsibility on the impact on Scotland of the UK budget. We might repeat such meetings as we consider the wider economic and fiscal issues and their influence on Scotland. The committee plans to take evidence before the summer recess on how to improve data collection and measure outcomes, which has been touched on during the debate. Our initial evidence session will, we hope, inform our future consideration of the issue and allow us to consider the issue’s relevance to other work that is before the committee. The need for relevant and sound data, which are generated and shared across the public sector, has been raised with the committee on numerous occasions and has been mentioned frequently in the debate. We highlighted the point in our summary of evidence on preventative spend. It has arisen during our discussions on fiscal sustainability and in our initial discussions with the OBR on forecasting Scottish taxes. It has to be said, to be reasonable, that we often get evidence on both sides of an issue. A lot of issues end up being about political choices because there is not a clear cut right or wrong answer. Our evidence session with the OBR discussed its methodology paper, which describes how it plans to forecast the proposed Scottish tax receipts. We will discuss the matter with HM Revenue and Customs next month; there is no doubt that data gathering will form part of that discussion. It will be interesting to consider how data that are used for that purpose can be shared and utilised for other purposes within the broad consideration of fiscal sustainability. I do not know what thought the Scottish Government has given to that opportunity, but it may be something that we can discuss during our round-table meeting next month. There is clearly a need for relevant and reliable data. For example, the convener mentioned the benefits and the positive outcomes that arise from providing free universal services. However, as a number of members have said, we need to be clear about what the outcomes are, and we need to gather relevant data on them if we are to persuade the public in general and, especially, sceptics. We must be clear about what motivates and informs a policy strategy, and about how we measure its effectiveness and establish whether it has achieved the desired results and secured all the intended benefits. Before I turn to individual points that have been made by members, I will highlight pensions, which are relevant in the context of fiscal sustainability and which may be considered in our work programme. Clearly, within our consideration of demography and an ageing population, the fiscal impact of pensions liability is particularly relevant. The committee’s budget adviser, in his report to us on the 2012-13 draft budget, stated: “The Scottish Government is to implement the public sector increases in pensions mandated by the UK Government. On average, pension contributions will increase by 3.2% over the next three years. The Scottish Government argument is that not to introduce these pension increases would cause cuts in its own budget leading to falls in employment and/or further pressure on public sector wages. It has also been informed by HM Treasury that if it does not introduce the changes, its block grant will anyway be cut. Clearly this is a somewhat unsatisfactory situation. It reinforces the argument that the Scottish Government should be responsible for the pension arrangements of public sector employees in Scotland.” He also made the point, in his briefing paper on fiscal sustainability, that “Public sector pensions are a potential source of significant pressure on the Scottish budget in the next decade.” I suspect that that will be discussed in Parliament in greater detail in the months and years ahead. I turn to points that members have made during the debate—some of which have been raised by several members. The convener of the Finance Committee, Kenneth Gibson, quoted the perhaps slightly unfortunate phrase that was used by the IMF: “unfavorable demographic trends”. A number of members, including Gavin Brown, Margaret Burgess, Jamie Hepburn and Mark McDonald have said that the phrase could be taken to mean that we would prefer that older people did not live longer, which is obviously not the case. I am glad to say that I have not heard anyone suggest that in the debate. John Swinney raised a number of issues in his opening speech. He talked about social democratic values that emphasise the importance of helping the most vulnerable people. In particular, he highlighted the need to maximise employment and minimise unemployment. That sentiment was echoed by other members. However, we must emphasise the point—which I think was made by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation—that employment in itself does not guarantee a move out of poverty. Many children are in poverty although at least one of their parents or carers works. That matter is currently outwith the powers of the Scottish Parliament, because it takes us into areas such as the minimum wage and tax credits. John Swinney also mentioned preventative expenditure and said that it needs to be collaborative. The committee has picked up on the need for the third sector to be included. Rightly or wrongly, the third sector sometimes perceives that it is not treated equally—especially by local government—and that there is sometimes a difference between what is said about treating everybody equally and what happens in practice. John Swinney also made the point that expenditure on social housing in Scotland is double what it is in England. However, there is widespread agreement in the committee and Parliament more generally that we would like it to be even greater. Gavin Brown quoted Professor Jeffery’s point about older people making a huge contribution, with which we completely agree. He also talked about the need to ensure that spending is genuinely preventative. I agree with him to a large extent on that, because almost everybody talks about how their expenditure is preventative and how spending £1 in a particular place will save £9 in another or £16 somewhere else. Clearly, there are different levels of return and different timescales for how quickly that return comes about. However much work we might do on the matter, there is probably no easy answer, because the reality is that much expenditure—even on services for older people as well as younger people—is genuinely preventative. Elaine Murray said that universal services should be reviewed, which other members also touched on. However, we must be careful when we talk about universal services. Some witnesses said that they want the universal services of the NHS and school education to continue, but questioned whether others—perhaps the newer ones that Parliament has introduced—should continue. A close examination of that question will be required. There is some fear that, if some universal services are attacked, others might be susceptible later on. Mary Fee talked a lot about independence. Certainly, on the surface, it appears that, if more money is available with independence, there could be better services. However, as she spoke, it struck me that the committee should perhaps consider the finances of independence in more detail. I am certainly happy to speak to the convener afterwards and see whether he is up for that. In the closing speeches, Gavin Brown talked about universal services. He said that the debate had been a little bit one sided whereas, at the Finance Committee, we had heard evidence on both sides. Perhaps that shows the difference between the committee, where we seek evidence from both sides in a fairly balanced way, and the chamber, where most of us express our opinion—although I am trying to be balanced—and take one side or the other. Gavin Brown probably finds himself in a minority when it comes to universal services. I thank all members for taking part in the debate, which has been fairly constructive. The committee commits itself to taking the issues forward.

If the member wants to give more money to local government, will she explain where she would give less money? The health service, perhaps?

Will the member give way?

I agree with the Unison briefing and its comment that it believes in subsidiarity and devolving power to the lowest level of competent democratic authority, but that it can often be unclear what the advocates of localism really mean. Their wider agenda often provides plenty of clues. Genuine localism should be about promoting the best interests of local people and communities. We are right to be suspicious of who is promoting localism today: a party that is controlled by Westminster, that rejected more autonomy under Murdo Fraser, and that thinks that the UK is a good thing. We could say a lot of things about localism. We could say that a lot of good things are happening. First, for the first time in quite a while, this year’s local government elections are being held on a separate day from elections to the Parliament, despite the long-term resistance of Labour in Glasgow. I hope that that means that we can concentrate on local issues. Secondly, the relationship between the Scottish Government and local government is greatly improved. The concordat represents a vast improvement on the previous top-down approach. I was a councillor from 1999 until 2007 under the Labour-Lib Dem Administration, and long and many were the complaints from all parties in Glasgow and COSLA about centralisation and the giving of lumps of money for fixed purposes that were not local priorities. There has been a great improvement in that respect. Thirdly, it is excellent that the right to buy has been severely restricted. The right to buy was imposed at a UK level and no attention was paid to local situations or problems. Now, councils and housing associations can do what is best for their local communities. However, I accept that local is not always best. With regard to the police, there is broad agreement that a regional approach has not been ideal. On many police issues, we are moving towards working at a national level, but with substantial input at council level and—perhaps even more importantly—at constituency and ward level. I know that the police will move resources to the wards in my constituency that have the greatest need. Liz Smith mentioned schools. In my area, I see little appetite among parents for running schools themselves. When they were asked about that, there was widespread agreement that they did not want to run schools.

I was just about to say that headteachers have a fair degree of autonomy already and that I would be happy for that to increase. However, Liz Smith should listen to parents. If she listened to parents in my constituency, she would find that they are not demanding to run schools. I recently visited St Ambrose high school, which happens to be in the Deputy Presiding Officer’s constituency, but a third of the pupils at which come from my constituency. Some really exciting ideas are being put into place there under the curriculum for excellence. For example, a musical theatre will involve the English and music departments working together, and the fact that the school is to have a new building on the edge of a country park will mean that geography and science departments will do joint work. That is the kind of localism that I want to see, and it is happening under the present system. There is, of course, room for improvement. One big improvement would be not to have list MSPs who cover such wide areas and to introduce the single transferable vote system, which would provide much more local representation but would still be a proportional representation system. There is room for improvement in Glasgow, where things are far too centralised. A much more local system is needed. Some positive signs have emerged. For example, in Byres Road, premises can have later licensing hours, but such exceptions are extremely unusual. Under Labour, Glasgow City Council has been far too centralised. I understand that in Highland Council, for example, more power is given to area committees. If folk in the east end of Glasgow want the pubs or off-licences to close at a slightly different time, why should they not be listened to? Similarly, planning in Glasgow has been far too centralised. The result has been that the west end has become more and more crowded, while the east and the north have vast tracts of empty land. A more localised approach needs to be adopted. The community planning partnership in Glasgow has also been far too centralised. Glasgow is not just one community; it is many communities, and they want a bit more power to make decisions. As far as localism is concerned, there are areas that are worth exploring. For example, in the longer term, I would like councils to have the power to set their own rates of local income tax or even land valuation tax. I do not see why councils should not have the power to choose from a slate of possibilities, including a tourist or bed tax. Such legislation has been implemented in the past—for example, councils were allowed to opt in to legislation on the drinking of alcohol outside. That approach has proved highly successful. Community councils have not had much of a mention, but if we believe in localism, how can we avoid talking about them? We need to consider whether we should give them more powers, although some of them might not want that.

It is ironic that the party that most strongly opposes more powers coming to Scotland claims to support localism. The motion says that we need to “return decision-making to Scottish communities.” How about we start with the Tories accepting that we should return decision making to the Scottish community as a whole?

9. To ask the Scottish Government whether future legislation relating to getting it right for every child principles will take a whole-child approach and cover social work and other services as well as education services. (S4O-00927)

Some young people live in the catchment area of a school that is in a different local authority area and attend that school. In those cases, a placing request is not involved and it is clear what school they are going to, but sometimes there is a problem with social work and other services following such children across the boundary. Will GIRFEC change that?

Hear, hear.

Mr Kelly talks about more responsibility, but does he believe that the bill provides the right level of responsibility, or does he think that we should have more, such as for raising an amount in tax that is at least as much as our expenditure?

Will the member take an intervention?

We spent many hours on the Scotland Bill in committee and it is good to be able to debate the bill in the chamber. The committee certainly covered a lot of ground. It is perhaps disappointing that some of the UK representatives did not engage more in debate when they came along to the committee, but rather just defended their position. I will comment on some of the financial aspects of the bill. First, the only red line was concerned with income tax and the adjustment to the block grant. Secondly, it is disappointing that there has been no movement on corporation tax, especially as that could have been used to create jobs. Coverage has mainly focused on dramatic reductions to the main rate, but the more likely option is that there would be minor reductions. In fact, that is what the UK is doing and we do not hear people saying that there is a race to the bottom and that it should not happen, nor do we hear the Tories saying that there should be an EU corporation tax rate. Minor reductions are part of a competitive world and could lead—and, in fact, have led—to more tax being paid in total. Further, we can use capital allowances to target particular areas or industries. The UK eventually did that for the games industry. The advantage of a smaller country is that it can be much more nimble and can respond more quickly to such needs. Some have said that, if we want better services, we need more tax and so we should never cut corporation tax. However, that argument is too simplistic. It is perfectly feasible to hold a left-of-centre position and generally support better services through taxation while supporting a lower corporation tax rate, or at least targeted capital allowances. The reason why that is possible is that we are competing internationally for jobs. If more companies operate in Scotland, that means more jobs in Scotland, which I—for one—want. It is disappointing that other parties oppose corporation tax powers for ideological reasons. That damages the availability of jobs to people in Scotland.

If the member listens to what I am saying and looks at the evidence, he will find that countries can attract businesses and jobs and can sometimes get more taxation by lowering their tax rate. That has been proven to apply to income tax, too. I certainly support progressive taxation, but there are limits. The income tax rate of 98 per cent when I was growing up was probably too high. Another financial power is the power to borrow. Nobody says that Scotland would or should be as stupid as the UK has been in the way that it goes about borrowing. Obviously, borrowing means that eventually the money has to be repaid. It is not wise for a country to borrow beyond its ability to repay, although that has certainly been practised at Westminster. Prudential borrowing means borrowing according to the ability to repay, depending on the savings that can be made and the expected income. That has worked well for local authorities throughout Scotland and beyond and would be a perfectly good model for the Scottish Parliament to operate on. In fact, it would be a good model for Westminster to operate on, too. It should just borrow what it can afford and save up for rainy days. More flexible borrowing powers would mean that we could pay for capital investment in things such as housing. When we invest in housing, that gives us not only more homes, which people desperately need, but more jobs. Once again, the Opposition parties that do not support borrowing powers are damaging the chances of Scots, particularly young Scots, to get jobs. Another financial measure that could have been in the bill is the power over air passenger duty. Heathrow and other London airports might be jam-packed full and might be happy if passenger numbers reduce, but that is not the case for Scotland. We want business and tourism to grow, so we need a growth in passenger numbers. Devolving power over APD would have helped that. Welfare powers were not initially on the agenda for the Scottish Government or the Scotland Bill Committee, but the third sector clearly emphasised that we should consider the issue, so it was added to the original list of six items. As we are responsible for housing and social care, it makes sense that we should have involvement in benefits. I will conclude by commenting on the attitude of some of the UK representatives—especially Michael Moore—at the committee. Throughout the sessions, it was disappointing that he and his colleagues took the attitude that they did. There was no sense that they were negotiating, listening or showing respect for the Parliament or the people of Scotland who elected the Government in 2011. Instead, we heard repeatedly from the UK Government that it was elected in 2010 and had a mandate to do whatever it wanted. It really was like the traditional colonial power telling the natives that they should be grateful for whatever crumbs came their way. We had a delegation from Western Australia, where there have been long negotiations between Canberra and Perth, and they found it incredibly hard to believe the attitude that London was taking. Recently, The Economist magazine has also taken a very patronising view of Scotland. The bill is a missed opportunity and is well past its sell-by date even before it is on the shelf. The UK Government will have to do much better if it wants to con the Scots.

If the member is critical of competition on corporation tax within the UK, is he also critical of such competition within the European Union? Does he think that there should be one uniform rate for the EU?

9. To ask the Scottish Government how the new national 4 qualification will be monitored to ensure consistent grading standards nationally. (S4O-00857)

It is good that there will be local control over the curriculum for excellence, but how will it work if, say, a pupil moves from one local authority area to another? Can we be assured that there will be consistency for that pupil?

I want to use two concepts in John Swinney’s motion as the main part of my speech. The first one is the term “greater fairness”, which is in the third line of the motion. We have often heard it said that in difficult times everyone should take some of the pain. I think that most of us would probably agree with that concept, although there is also an argument that those who got us into this financial mess and profited from it in the past should take all of the pain and that those who were innocent in that regard should not take any. Assuming, however, that all of us should bear some of the pain and that those who are better able to should suffer more than others, how does the UK budget fare? The answer has to be: not very well. First and most obvious, there is the question of income tax. It is perhaps seen by most people as the fairest of all the taxes, because it links tax with the ability to pay. That is why council tax should be replaced by a local income tax. Of course we welcome the fact that allowances at the bottom of the scale have been increased to £9,205, which will take some people out of paying tax and is in itself positive. However, at the same time we see 300,000 pensioners in Scotland being hit harder, with their allowances frozen. What about those at the top? If we believed that everyone should share some of the pain, that would actually be an argument for increasing the top rate of income tax, even if only temporarily. However, what do we see from the Tories? We see the 50p rate cut to 45p and we see Labour abstaining on the vote on that very point. Did Labour again just abandon principle, which we have become used to? Did Labour fear upsetting middle England, or was it just fear of supporting anything that the SNP does, be it good or bad? Perhaps it was just incompetence. Let us remember that Labour introduced the 50p rate just before the most recent general election and has said that it will not reintroduce the rate; it also abolished the 10p rate of tax. I do not think that anyone is saying that we should return to the 83 per cent rate of income tax, or even the 98 per cent rate, which I remember. However, surely the 50p rate is not so drastic. Jamie Hepburn and Willie Rennie in particular addressed whether the 50p rate was bringing in enough money. One reason for it not bringing in enough money is that the rules are so loose for those at the top, who do not pay under the PAYE system, that they are able to move their income around between tax years. Perhaps that is one of the things that need to be tightened up.

I will take Patrick Harvie’s intervention first.

Absolutely. That is the point that I was trying to make.

We could move on to discuss a number of European countries. The Nordic countries—which many of us aspire to be like—often have higher taxation than we do. We need to have a more progressive rate all the way through. Jumping from a rate of 20p to 40p strikes me as a little odd, so the whole thing needs a good shake. There were signs in the budget of welfare spending going up, because more people are unemployed, yet something like £16 billion has already been taken out of welfare spending. In his budget statement, George Osborne talked about taking out a further £10 billion by 2016. Who that will affect is pretty clear. If he really wanted to cut welfare spending, he could do that by creating jobs—the SNP and Labour would support that. However, taking out funding without creating jobs will hurt those who are at the poorest end of society. The acting chief executive of Citizens Advice Scotland, Susan McPhee, said: “There is nothing in the budget that will seriously relieve the pressure on those who are suffering the most ... Today ... the government has missed a real opportunity to support low income” households “and instead increased the financial support of high earners. The government need to provide more support for those who really need it.” We all have a lot of choices to make. One choice that Labour must make is whether it prefers to continue in the UK with a Tory Government every few years or to have an independent Scotland with an SNP Government or even a Labour Government.

Will the member give way?

I thank Jim Eadie for raising the subject. The key points on which we all agree are that there is a humanitarian crisis, which appears to be worsening, and that we as a Parliament want to speak with a united voice and commend Oxfam and others for the work that they are doing. The motion and the Oxfam briefing refer—as Jim Eadie did—to the need for an international arms trade treaty, and I fully support that call. It seems almost inevitable that if arms are poured into an area, violence will be encouraged. Situations can be so chaotic, and the opposing sides of conflicts can be so ill defined, that weapons are almost bound to be abused and are often not used as the suppliers intended—if the suppliers had good motives, which is usually not the case. It is clear that there is a need for regime change in Syria. It would be good if that progress could be made without as much western involvement as there has been in other countries, in which it sometimes seems that more harm than good has been done. I hope that the future regime will be better than the present one, but that is sadly not always the case. Some of us can remember when Milton Obote was ousted in Uganda and there was a lot of celebration internationally, and yet his replacement was Idi Amin, and things went from bad to worse. That has also been the experience elsewhere. I am concerned about how minorities—Christians, other minorities and women—will be treated in Syria. I had a good briefing from a group called Open Doors, which seeks to help Christian minorities who are under pressure. It currently rates Syria 36th in the world on its list of countries that most oppress Christians. There are around 20 million people in Syria, of whom around 1.5 million to 2 million are at least nominal Christians. The rest of the population is about 74 per cent Sunni and 12 per cent Shia. We support democracy and believe that the majority should be enfranchised in a way that it has not been in the past, but we hope that that majority will be tolerant of minorities. Christianity is a middle eastern religion that has spread to the west and is sometimes now seen as a western religion. That has not often helped local Christians in countries such as Syria. When western powers have blundered into countries such as Iraq—often illegally—the situation can get worse, and it can be said that the situation for Christians in Iraq is now worse than it was before. One issue that is of particular concern is the freedom for people to change their religion or to have no religion at all, just as we would want people to be able to choose any political view that they wish. All those things must be hopes for the future of Syria. The freedom to choose one’s religion or to have none is not just a western value, but a human right that is non-negotiable. Although we want regime change in Syria—and I add my voice to the voices of others who have said that—we do not want just any regime to come in. We want a regime that looks after women, Christians and other minorities.

Will the member give way?

Housing benefit affects a lot of people and, if this goes wrong, a lot of people will be seriously damaged. We have heard a lot of figures this afternoon. Glasgow Housing Association states that 70 per cent of its tenants—about 41,000 people—receive some form of housing benefit and that 63.4 per cent of its income comes through housing benefit. It is interesting to note that GHA is about to start building one-bedroom houses for the first time since the housing stock transfer. We have heard some of the major concerns both in the chamber this afternoon and from those organisations that have briefed us. Among those concerns is the underoccupation penalty, or bedroom tax, which the SFHA and the National Housing Federation estimate will affect some 70,000 households in Scotland, or 32 per cent of working-age claimants. Barnardo’s makes the point—which Elaine Murray and Kevin Stewart raised in the debate—that there are often good reasons why siblings cannot share a bedroom. For example, one might need bulky medical equipment. There is also real concern about direct payments to claimants, which was touched on by Drew Smith. I presume that that is the Tory idea of encouraging self-reliance; however, the reality is that it is putting pressure on vulnerable people. Rent arrears are already a challenge for housing associations and will probably get worse, resulting in a danger of evictions and homelessness. That will also make housing association income less secure and more of a risk for lenders. In addition, we have the major problem of the secondary legislation, which we await from Westminster. There are other concerns. For example, Margaret McDougall mentioned that the DWP expects 80 per cent of claimants to be online by 2017, but Parkhead Housing Association in my constituency has told me that only 30 per cent of its tenants are currently online. Let us look at the Conservative amendment. Sometimes, when we look at the wording of these things we realise how ridiculous they are. The amendment states that the new benefits system will be “simpler for people to navigate”. We all accept that the present system is far too complex, but we have been promised simplification many times before and have not yet seen it. In this case, I will believe it when I see it. The amendment also says that it will be “harder for people to defraud” the system. The ultimate way of stopping people defrauding the system is to have no benefits at all. I presume that, as benefits are reduced, there is less and less room for defrauding. It is pretty clear that that is a smokescreen for just cutting benefits, which will have the side effect of less fraud. The Conservative amendment goes on to say that it will be “no longer possible to be better-off on benefits than in work”. In the intervention that Mr Johnstone would not take from me, I was going to suggest that, if people are getting more in benefits than they would get if they were working, the answer is to increase the pay rate. I notice that the Tories have not supported the call for an increase in the minimum wage.

It is very clear to me that both the Tories and the Lib Dems are out to help the rich and damage the poor. Given what we have heard about the need for advice, Glasgow City Council’s attempt to close five of the citizens advice bureaux in Glasgow was shameful. Fortunately, pressure has made the council change its mind. The Labour amendment talks about the need for “a clear strategy to mitigate the impact”. That is fine, but does that require more resources? I presume that that is Labour’s thinking. We have heard that there should be more money for housing—where would Labour save it from? Would it come from the health budget? I find it unacceptable if the Labour Party is going to cut the health budget and hit sick people.

Another way in which private tenants could be protected is through tenancy agreements, which we already have in the registered social landlord sector. Could they be rolled out into the private sector?

One of my first memories of the Commonwealth as a concept is of my visit to Zambia in 1979. It was my first trip outside Europe. At that time, southern Rhodesia was the focus of many problems, and Zambia was suffering bombings, food shortages and suchlike. I was 22 at the time, and I remember my mother being asked whether she was worried about my going to Zambia. She said that she was not, because the Queen had just been there for the Commonwealth heads of government summit, so it must have been okay. One of the things that came out of the Lusaka summit in 1979 was the “Lusaka Declaration on Racism and Racial Prejudice”. It is worth reading out a little bit of it tonight. “We, the Commonwealth Heads of Government ... have decided to proclaim our desire to work jointly ... for the eradication of all forms of racism and racial prejudice. The Commonwealth is an institution devoted to the promotion of international understanding and world peace, and to the achievement of equal rights for all citizens regardless of race, colour, sex, creed or political belief, and is committed to the eradication of the dangerous evils of racism and racial prejudice.” I could read the whole thing, but time does not allow it. The declaration resonates as much in 2012 as it did in 1979. Different ideas probably come to different people’s minds when they think of the Commonwealth. Three ideas come to my mind. The first is that the Commonwealth is friendly. Many of us automatically think of the Commonwealth as a group of friends, when compared to other international groupings such as the United Nations and NATO. We have family ties with people in many Commonwealth countries—especially Australia, New Zealand and Canada, although when I was in Zambia and Malawi I was struck by the number of Scottish place names there and the links that we have with those countries, too. The second idea that comes to my mind is that the Commonwealth is not the empire. The British empire is a historical fact—some of us may like the concept and some of us may loathe it. Either way, the empire has now given way and been replaced by the Commonwealth. It is hard to mention the transition from empire to Commonwealth without thinking of all the nations that used to be ruled from London but are now free. What a good idea. The third thing that comes to mind is the Commonwealth games, which have already been mentioned. Members will not be surprised that the subject is of particular interest to me, as much of the games in 2014 will take place in my Shettleston constituency. Members who are not aware of that will be soon, I hope, as I plan to keep on reminding them of it over the next two years. Specifically, in the east end of Glasgow, we will have the opening ceremony at Celtic park, the athletes’ village just across the road, and the velodrome and indoor sports arena across another road. Not much further away, we will have the swimming at Tollcross and the hockey at Glasgow green. I thank all members who took part in the publicity event with the giant trainer in the Parliament last week, and I thank those who wore their trainers on Monday to promote the games. One of the good things about the games is that Scotland competes on her own and our athletes do not get into trouble for waving the saltire. For that reason, I am much more interested in the Commonwealth games than I am in the Olympics. Finally, it is worth noting that the Commonwealth includes both republics and countries that accept the Queen as their head of state. That certainly seems to be a reasonable arrangement to me. Whether or not Scotland continues to have a monarchy or decides to be a republic in due course, we can still be a full member of the Commonwealth.

I thank John Park for raising the issue. I certainly agree with a number of the points in his motion. He mentions Mid Scotland and Fife, which allows me to mention Glasgow. I thank Save the Children for its briefing for last week’s debate and for the figures on Glasgow with which it provided me. Some of them make stark, if not awful, reading. They show that 35 per cent of children in Glasgow are growing up in poverty, compared with the Scotland-wide figure of 20 per cent; that in 15 council wards in the city, more than 30 per cent of children live in poverty and, in two wards, half of all children are in poverty; and that about 17,000 children in Glasgow live in severe poverty, which is 18 per cent of all children in the city, compared with the national average of 9 per cent. Unemployment and low wages are at the heart of child poverty in Glasgow. There are 32,900 unemployed people in Glasgow, which is 11.3 per cent of the working-age population, and 19.3 per cent of workers in Glasgow earn less than £7 an hour, compared with the Scottish average of 19 per cent. That leads to the fact that 62 per cent of children in Glasgow live in low-income households and almost 80,000 children live in households that are dependent on benefits. Those figures are not acceptable. John Park’s motion also mentions that more than half the children who are in poverty “live in a household where at least one adult works”. All those figures say to me that, to reduce poverty, it is essential to roll out the living wage or, preferably, raise the statutory minimum wage. I spoke on the subject last week, so I thought that I should do something a little different tonight. I got a fair bit of reaction on Facebook to last week’s debate and to some of the comments that I made. I thought that it would be useful to deal with some of those comments. If members want to look at them in more detail, they can check my Facebook page. Somebody said that working but having to claim tax credits is “such a shame.” I totally agree. I welcome the fact that we have tax credits, but in some cases they are in effect a subsidy for profitable employers, who should pay a proper living wage. The point was made that some smaller employers cannot afford to pay a living wage, and that we need to consider the employer and the employee and the fact that raising wages might mean that fewer staff are taken on. I agree with those comments. One person said: “When minimum wage went up this past October I did not reduce my staff or cut hours. Instead I cut my own salary. Is this fair? The point I am trying to make is this debate should appreciate both sides, the employee AND employer, and how raising minimum wage affects both sides.” I agree with what that guy says, but I suggest that that is not the case for all employers. Rather than subsidise all employers with tax credits, my answer is that we should roll out the living wage or raise the minimum wage and in that way save paying tax credits for employers. That money can then be much better used to target businesses that need support, such as smaller businesses and perhaps businesses in rural and poorer areas. That would be similar to what has been done with the small business bonus scheme, which has been welcomed by small businesses. I do not have time to go through all the points that were made on Facebook, but another was that we should limit top pay as a multiple of the lowest pay. That is a useful suggestion, but it should be done in addition to introducing the living wage. Someone asked whether, having done so, we could compete internationally. I think that we could, because we need to tie in with the on-going fair trade campaign. It is good that the subject of the living wage has received a fair amount of coverage. It will be on the agenda at the Scottish National Party conference this weekend, and I hope to speak on it again then.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what the tendering process is for work related to the Forth replacement crossing project. (S4O-00742)

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that he would oppose any move towards protectionism or the restriction of free trade, as proposed by Labour? Does he agree with Strathclyde partnership for transport that the best deal for its new escalators is offered by Czech company Otis? Does he agree that exporting companies such as Dewar’s whisky and Scottish Leather Group in my constituency, which export much of their produce, would be hugely damaged if trade were restricted, especially in regard to valuable jobs in Scotland?

Does the member agree that there was also a lot of scaremongering before the national minimum wage was introduced, which has been shown to be largely false?

Will the member give way?

It was when I was working in London that I first became aware of the campaign for the living wage. A number of members have mentioned the campaigns in London. At that time, the campaigners were looking for £7.45 as their local living wage, and I believe that they are now aiming for £8.30. They started with the public sector and got both the major mayoral candidates to commit to the living wage. They moved on to put pressure on private companies, which were named and shamed, and I believe that there were demonstrations outside their offices. As has been mentioned, some of those companies were embarrassed because they had portrayed themselves as having corporate social responsibility while their cleaners were not getting a living wage. We have had some good briefings for today’s debate, particularly from Save the Children, which makes the point that women and children particularly benefit from the living wage. It states: “As an example, research by the Scottish Government has shown that implementing the living wage would increase the net income for a single parent with one child by 5 per cent, while a married couple with one child would see their income increase by 11 per cent.”

The issue of equal pay was avoided by most local authorities for quite a number of years when it should have been addressed. That stored up a huge number of the problems that Glasgow City Council and other local authorities have had. If we had seriously believed in equal pay, it should have been addressed sooner, so it is disappointing that it took legal action to get it sorted out. I will come back to another point on that in a minute. Save the Children’s briefing for the debate continues: “Moreover, the financial benefits of wage increases will tend to be greater under universal credit because this will withdraw benefits at a flatter and usually slower rate. This should have positive implications for child poverty.” That gives added impetus, despite all the problems with the Welfare Reform Bill. On local government, I believe strongly in the concordat, which has been a huge advantage for local government and gives local authorities the freedom to make their own decisions. Previously, we had a centralist, top-down approach that was resented by councillors of all political parties. The reality is that councils can and should make their own decisions. I welcome the minister’s commitment to work with local authorities, but I strongly defend local authorities’ rights as well. Going back to John Wilson’s point, a problem in Glasgow was the arm’s-length external organisations. As a councillor at the time, I strongly opposed that. I and members of other parties opposed those organisations because of the fear that terms and conditions would be undermined and that women in one arm’s-length organisation would be more poorly paid than people doing an equivalent job in another organisation. Although there are good things happening in Glasgow, I remain to be reassured that that has not been a problem. The statutory minimum wage has been mentioned several times. The problem with the living wage is that it would still be only for the public sector and, potentially, for those with contracts surrounding the public sector. That would leave the private sector to continue largely unaffected.

The living wage could have a ripple effect, but there are still examples of areas in London where that is not happening and it is a long way away from happening. I welcome the fact that the Labour Party introduced a statutory minimum wage. That was not happening, so it needed statute; I argue that we need statute for the living wage. Labour has asked whether we would have a higher minimum wage in Scotland if we were independent. That question applies to all the parties—all the parties must say what their policy on a statutory minimum wage would be if Scotland were independent. I assume that, occasionally, the Labour Party might get elected after independence and that, therefore, its view on a minimum wage would be important. I am running out of time, but I will touch on the nonsense that Margaret Mitchell talked. Her argument that we should push wages down until we have all the people working—filling potholes—that we possibly can is basically an argument for slavery. By that argument, employers should pay only enough food for their workers to live on and no wage whatever. She also used the word “subsidy”, which is ridiculous. One of the arguments for the living wage is that, currently, we are having to subsidise private companies with tax credits. I welcome tax credits—which were also introduced by the Labour Party—but tax credits for a profitable company are a subsidy and that should not be acceptable.

This reminds me of Westminster, which is much stricter with time. I thank the Scottish Government for its many investments in rail, especially those that have benefited the east end of Glasgow. First, I welcome the Airdrie to Bathgate rail link, which has not been given the attention or praise that it deserves. Despite the name that it is often given, the line does much more than connect Airdrie and Bathgate, as many members know. It has opened up six stations in my constituency, with services every 15 minutes from the east end of Glasgow directly to Bathgate, Edinburgh Park, Haymarket and Waverley. Secondly, I am delighted to welcome investment in Dalmarnock rail station of some £11 million or £12 million. Dalmarnock is set to become the station for the Commonwealth games, and as a legacy for the area it will be the station for Celtic Park, the indoor sports arena and the area in general. There have been many other improvements recently, such as a new pedestrian bridge at Shettleston and new access ramps at local stations, which are extremely welcome. This is a difficult time to embark on major new expenditure; a challenge that we face is to hold on to what we have. It would be disappointing to think that any station might close. The Victorians left us with a tremendous network that is comparable to that of many European cities. Strathclyde partnership for transport—which used to be the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Authority and the Strathclyde Passenger Transport Executive—has sought to protect and develop the network over the years. Beeching cut back lines and services to such an extent that we now realise that what happened was far too drastic and seriously damaged the overall network. I would be concerned if any station were to close, especially Duke Street, which lies just outside my constituency but is the closest station to Parkhead Forge and the retail park, which are the major shopping centres in my constituency—it is also the closest station to my office. Not only do we not want stations to close but we want to have a bit of vision and we want new stations to open, even if that happens only in the medium or longer term. Top of my wish list is a station at Parkhead Forge on the main line between Glasgow and Edinburgh via Airdrie and Bathgate, which would not just serve the shopping centre but give direct access to Celtic Park from Glasgow city centre and from Edinburgh. There are problems with the site, because the track that crosses Duke Street has a neutral section, and I am advised that if a train stops in that section it is unable to start again. That makes it more expensive to put a station there. However, it would be useful to have a station at Parkhead Forge. I also hope for the electrification of the Whifflet line, which serves three stations in my constituency, to allow trains to use the low level at Glasgow Central station. That touches on a point that Patricia Ferguson made about congestion in the two high-level stations. In the long run, if we could get more trains into the low level at Queen Street and at Central, there could be much more train transport. There are also problems with congestion at Partick and we need to consider turn-back at Charing Cross. My third main wish would be for crossrail at some stage, which would link the north and the south of the city. A station at Glasgow Cross would be a tremendous boost for the Saltmarket in that area, which has struggled. We face challenging times. We should protect the system that we have, but we must also have a bit of vision for the longer term and look at how we can expand the network in Glasgow and in Scotland.

Will the minister confirm whether the proposed sustainable procurement bill will consider the inclusion of the living wage in contracts?

Does that not make the point that we need more powers if we are to do something much better than the UK?

Will the member give way?

We are where we are and we cannot rewind the clock to be somewhere else, but we must remember why we and the economy are in the current position. Successive Labour Governments failed to save in the good times. Unlike the situation in Norway, which has an oil fund for a rainy day of £338 billion, our money has been squandered, so our room for manoeuvre is limited.

One reason why I was elected to Westminster was that the public realised what a mess Gordon Brown had made of the economy. I am afraid that the good times had passed by the time I got to Westminster. In my first week, Westminster was trying to save the banks. I mention in passing that, at lunch time, I was at a good event about the unions into schools initiative and about unions and young workers, which Neil Findlay chaired. We had a tremendous debate, in which young people shared a variety of views—particularly about youth unemployment, training and suchlike. It would certainly have stood comparison with many of our debates in the chamber. It was really good to hear the young people’s views, and I commend the event. We do not have as much control over capital expenditure as we should have. It is determined largely by Westminster and it has been cut by far too much. We all know that investing in housing and infrastructure creates jobs, as well as better homes, hospitals, transport links and so on. My constituents and I very much appreciate the investment from the Scottish Government—sometimes in conjunction with Glasgow City Council—in and around Glasgow Shettleston in recent years. It is good not to forget some of the good things: the M74 extension, which has been a tremendous boost to business and jobs; the rail link from Bathgate to Edinburgh; the Commonwealth games and the forthcoming village; Clyde gateway, which targets people in our area, including young people; the Dalmarnock station upgrade; and the east end regeneration route, which is a much better route into the east end for businesses. All those things have created jobs already; they are creating jobs; and I believe that they will create jobs. Today, and during previous debates on the budget, we have heard a lot from people in other parties about their desire to see more jobs created. However, once again today, we have not heard about what should be cut so that investment in other areas could create more jobs. We are still waiting to hear that. Obviously, there has been irresponsible borrowing, and we do not want to repeat that, but it makes absolutely no sense for the Scottish Parliament to have no borrowing powers at all. Councils are allowed to borrow and, in general, under the prudential code, have borrowed responsibly. The Scotland Bill Committee has considered this issue at length. If David Cameron is serious about letting us have more powers, let him start with borrowing. We should have some prudential borrowing, without some arbitrary limit. I turn now to the business atmosphere. As an accountant, I like things that can be measured, especially numbers. Confidence and atmosphere, for example, are not easily measured, so they are just a little bit subjective for me. However, I am happy to accept that confidence and the mood of the country are extremely important in these times. If we are all gloom and doom, as some seem to be, we discourage people from investing and from trying new things. Sadly, we repeatedly hear negative comments from Labour and no new, positive, practical suggestions. I do not agree with artificial optimism, but I do agree with being positive and seeing opportunities, even in difficult times. My colleague Paul Wheelhouse has mentioned some encouraging quotes from the Federation of Small Businesses. If we can get small businesses growing, we will be well on the road to recovery. Corporation tax has been mentioned already. We should spell out why we would want to play around with any corporation tax powers that we could get. For example, a reduction of even 1 or 2 per cent can actually increase the total tax take, allowing more money to go into public services. It can also create more jobs, and industries can be targeted—not with the rate itself, but with capital allowances.

The UK Government proposes that a reduction in corporation tax of 1 or 2 per cent—or, I think, 3 per cent—will boost jobs and the economy. Broadly, we would follow the same logic. No one on the Scotland Bill Committee was suggesting that we should have half of Ireland’s rate, but it was often suggested that we should play around with the rate by 1, 2 or 3 per cent. As I have already said, I believe that by using capital allowances, we can target areas much more effectively—for example, the games industry or enterprise zones. In the past, enterprise zones benefited greatly from tax measures and other things. In my final few seconds, I will mention comparisons with Europe. The Tories are in slightly risky territory on this issue. One way of comparing economies is to consider exchange rates. For many years after the euro was brought in, it was worth 70p. It is now worth 80p. Will someone please explain to me why the euro has done better than the pound?

I thank George Adam for raising this issue, which is well worth a debate this evening. In the Parliament, most of us are committed to the living wage—to the idea that people should be able to live on what they are paid for the work that they do. Most of us agree that the statutory minimum wage is not enough to live on. I see fair trade as a logical extension of that. I hope that our concern does not stop at the borders of Scotland, or even at those of the UK or Europe; we should also concern ourselves with people who are further away, and especially with the poorest people in Africa, Asia, South America and elsewhere. If people in Scotland who make clothes for us should be properly paid, so should be people in Asia who make clothes for us. The reality is that we benefit from that, too. As poorer countries around the world become better off, people there start to afford to buy our products and to travel to visit us. In my lifetime, quite a change has occurred in a number of countries. For example, we used to think of Hong Kong and South Korea as low-wage economies which made quite cheap products, but they have now moved up to become comparable with us. I like a song that has been sung by a guy called Ian Davison that uses the phrase “the worldwide minimum wage”. That very much appeals to me, although I accept that it is probably a bit optimistic in the short term. However, fair trade is a step in the right direction, which is why I am enthusiastic about it. As George Adam said, we can remember in our lifetimes some pretty awful fair trade products. I remember when pretty much all that was available was fair trade coffee, and some of it was not exactly great. Now, a wide range of products is available, including tea, coffee, fruit juice, chocolate and wine. In my constituency office, we try to use as many fair trade products as possible. We also try to use cleaning products that are approved by the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection, which means that they are not tested on animals. I mention those two aspects because we should commend the Co-op, which I suggest is better than all the other supermarkets, for its wide range of fair trade products and products that are not tested on animals. I am sure that we will all give examples of good things that are happening in our areas. I understand that 200 young people will go to Glasgow Caledonian University in March to meet representatives from Palestine who will say how much fair trade has helped them. We often have a problem with the word “charity” and how we use it, and we have mixed reactions to it. We know of great charities—which I am sure we all support—such as Mary’s Meals, Oxfam and Tearfund. However, the negative side is that we do not want people to live on charity in the long term, which is why fair trade is important; it requires paying people what they deserve for the work that they do. We can build on that for a variety of related campaigns—for example, Christian Aid and others are working on countries being able to tax the profits that are made in those countries. Some big international companies do not like to report the profits that they earn in individual countries, but people in my profession and others are pushing for such reporting. The belief is that a lot of underreporting takes place in many countries, so companies do not pay the tax that they should pay poorer countries, just as they do not pay workers there what they deserve. There is a long way to go, but it is great that we are having the debate. Fair trade is a great first step along the way and I am happy to support the motion.

6. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what plans are in place to provide funding or other travel assistance to schools from deprived areas that cannot afford to visit the Parliament. (S4O-00691)

Does the member accept that Westminster targets schools that do not visit? Will the SPCB at least look at that and study from which areas schools are not coming? Perhaps we could consider future assistance. In my constituency, the reality is that parents in better-off areas raise the money and kids can go to places, but that does not happen in poorer areas.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am interested in the fact that the member thinks that we should not target the larger stores. They seem to be doing very well compared with some of the smaller shops to which she has referred, which have had to close down. Is there not an inconsistency in the member’s approach?

There is a lot to welcome in the settlement for local government, not least the fact that the share of the Scottish Government budget stays at 37.2 per cent, which is comparable with 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10. Once again, we all agree that we would like to give more to local government, but once again we have heard little from Opposition parties about where that money is to come from. If Labour and others want to give more to local government, we must assume that they would cut another major part of the Scottish budget, which would presumably be the NHS. Mark Griffin says that if we just pass on all the cuts automatically, there would be £1 billion more for local government. That would therefore mean £1 billion less for the health service, so I assume that it is Labour policy to sack nurses and doctors and close Lightburn hospital, among other things. One of the SNP’s key successes has involved the concordat, the end of ring fencing and better relationships with local authorities. The single outcome agreements have helped to move the focus from resources input to outcomes achieved. I remember from my time in Glasgow City Council and COSLA that there were endless complaints from councillors of all parties that there was far too much dictation from central Government and too much ring fencing. Local authorities often know what is best for their local areas.

Yes—when I was a councillor, the constant criticism from Labour towards COSLA and the then Scottish Government was amazing. We welcome the fact that, in an age of seemingly inevitable cuts, when English councils are losing 18.6 per cent from 2011-12 to 2014-15, the figure for Scotland has been restricted to 6.2 per cent. It is worth remembering some of the achievements of the SNP Government past and present. I find when I meet with my constituents that the council tax freeze is one of the most popular achievements. Of course it is true that some of the very rich people could afford to pay a bit more, and that some of the poorest people are not paying any council tax at all, but we should remember the ordinary people who are in the middle, especially the pensioners. Those extra few pounds a week can make a huge difference to people’s lives. Another achievement that I think we can say is shared between local and central Government is the living wage. Both the SNP Government and local councils have been pushing for that, and one hopes that it can be built into more contracts in the future. However, the fact remains that the living wage is voluntary for the private sector. We must move towards a higher statutory minimum wage, which is currently outwith this Government’s power and which both Labour and the coalition in London have failed to address. Glasgow continues to have a good deal, and I welcome the fact that we are fifth on the list for funding per head after the island authorities, including Argyll and Bute. Some people might ask whether Glasgow is getting too much, to which my answer is clearly no. One of my arguments in that regard is that funding should follow need, which is where I disagree with Alison McInnes, who was talking about moving to a floor of 90 per cent or some other—fairly arbitrary—level. I am happy with 85 per cent, and we should have a certain amount of fairness. However, we should remember the needs of not only Glasgow, but some of the other areas at the top of the list, such as West Dunbartonshire in sixth place, Inverclyde in seventh place and Dundee City in eighth place. There is, for example, a much higher proportion of people abusing drugs in Glasgow in comparison with its population. Museums and art galleries are funded in different ways throughout Scotland: in Glasgow they are primarily under the council umbrella, but in Edinburgh a lot more are funded nationally. All those factors must be taken into account if we are looking at rearranging local government financing. I do not always agree with Glasgow City Council’s decisions or with how it does things. I defend its right to make decisions, although it often makes the wrong ones. For example, the council was given plenty of money to implement smaller class sizes, but it absolutely refused to do that, to the detriment of the children in my constituency and a number of others. It lavished money on an iconic transport museum while primary schools continued to operate in an awful state. I recently visited a primary school in my constituency that has huge gaps in the ceiling; the water is coming through, and the staff are really struggling. In Glasgow schools, smart boards, which should be pretty standard these days, are largely funded by parent councils, which means that the better-off areas have them while the poorer areas do not. Another major criticism is the fact that many council departments in Glasgow have been moved outwith democratic control. Other points that I welcome include the suggestion that councils will be allowed more freedom on council tax for empty properties. We have a number of such properties in Glasgow, and I know that there are others elsewhere. If we could bring some of that revenue back in, that would be great. I will touch on the public health levy. It is clear that some of the big supermarket chains are extremely profitable and some of the smaller shops have suffered, so moving the burden a little bit towards some of the highly profitable companies must be a good thing. It has been suggested that those same large supermarkets will get a boost from minimum unit pricing, so it sounds like the levy will have a balancing effect. When I was elected last May, there were three large supermarkets in my constituency. Now, there are five, which suggests that the supermarkets, far from being worried, are doing extremely well. In the long-term, we must consider other measures. We need to replace the council tax eventually, but we are where we are. I welcome the settlement for local government and encourage the voters of Scotland to vote in May for the very best councillors that they can find for their wards and their councils.

We have information from, for example, Asda, about the impact on its profitability and so on. What information is the member looking for that he does not have?

3. To ask the Scottish Government when the chief constable will be appointed for the proposed single Scottish police service. (S4O-00671)

Following on from John Finnie’s questions, does the cabinet secretary feel that, given that there is a bit of a changeover period, the potential exists for good decisions to be held back and for a few bad decisions to be made?

We are three minutes into the member’s speech and I do not think that we have heard a positive suggestion of how more jobs could be created.

It is clear that John Swinney had limited room for manoeuvre in producing the budget. It is disappointing that Labour and, I believe, the other parties have not suggested any amendments. When I was on Glasgow City Council and there were only two or three SNP members, we generally managed to propose amendments to the budget. Of course, that requires a proposal to save money in one place to spend it somewhere else. I wonder why Labour and the Tories can suggest nothing to improve the budget. It seems amazing that they have spent so many months on the issue but come up with absolutely nothing. Are they just scared of providing an alternative cut to go along with their wish lists? That says something about the credibility of the Opposition parties. The cuts from Westminster have been extremely severe, particularly to capital spending. I welcome the additional funding that has been announced today of £380 million over three years, which is encouraging. We all agree that building houses and other capital projects gives us the infrastructure as well as jobs during the process. Linked to that is the fact that we still have no power to borrow. Borrowing powers would give us a huge boost. Even the proposal in the Scotland Bill would be something, although prudential borrowing would be better, because then we could borrow what we could afford. It is worth noting that, under prudential borrowing, local authorities have been prudent in their borrowing in recent years, whereas Westminster certainly has not.

I was trying to say that the Scotland Bill has flawed powers and that we could do better if we had the same prudential borrowing powers as local authorities have. To give local authorities their due, they have generally been wise in their borrowing in recent years, unlike Westminster under Labour and the coalition. I welcome the announcement of extra funding for housing—the £45 million that was announced today, the £10 million that was announced last week and the £42 million for loans. I hope that that will be welcomed across the board. Of course, we all want more money to be spent on housing. I have high regard for the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations. Its brief for today’s debate rightly makes the case for more affordable housing, which would have advantages relating to energy efficiency and home adaptations, as preventative spend. All that is fine and good, but there is no question but that Keith Brown and his colleagues in Government are committed to housing. Just yesterday, Keith Brown was in my constituency to visit two new housing projects. I welcome the fact that the Government has listened to the argument from the housing sector and from the other parties. If the other parties are not satisfied, they need to tell us where the funding is to come from. To give Mr Harvie and his colleague their due, they are fairly open about that and say that they would drop the Forth crossing project and spend the money on other things. That is honest of them. However, we do not have an equivalent from Labour or the Tories. We can perhaps assume that they would drop the Forth crossing to build housing and thus damage a huge part of the Scottish economy.

I am not sure that selling off the assets that we have left in public ownership is the answer. Once we hear a Liberal Democrat speech, we will hear that party’s positive suggestions. The colleges have not done badly at all on capital spending. In my area, John Wheatley College and North Glasgow College have excellent buildings, and the City of Glasgow College is getting about £193 million. The extra money for student support is extremely welcome. Today we heard about an extra £11 million for that. Some of the other parties have asked for more funding for colleges. My assumption is that they want to take money away from universities to give more to colleges and to deal with that by charging students to go to university. In particular, we have recently had an indication that Labour wants to do that. I cannot agree with that at all. University or college education benefits not just the individual but the whole of society. If Labour is saying that rich families can send their kids to university but poor folk have to make do with college, that is not on. Colleges and universities both have a part to play. People have different gifts and we should not value academic above other, practical gifts. All people, old and young, if they are able, should have the opportunity to choose university or college.

If that £74 million was taken away from the universities, I hate to think what that would do to poor students who are trying to get to university. It is ironic that while we discuss the housing, transport, universities and colleges budgets we are sending money down to the south-east of England.

Why are we subsidising the south-east of England?

Will Mary Scanlon agree that some students are staying too long at college, and that some universities are not very appreciative of what students are learning at college?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister consider the idea that all flat owners should contribute to some kind of reserve or sinking fund so that, when a major common repair comes along, there will be funds available to pay for it?

10. To ask the Scottish Government how many businesses in Glasgow Shettleston have received support from the small business bonus scheme. (S4O-00648)

Does the minister agree that although Governments are often accused of helping only new businesses and not always helping existing businesses, the small business bonus scheme’s advantage has been that it has been a tremendous boost for existing small businesses, including local shops in my constituency—in fact, when the cabinet secretary met a shopkeeper in my constituency, he was congratulated on that—and that the scheme helps to protect such businesses in difficult times and thereby saves jobs that might otherwise have been lost?

Does the member accept that although some things, such as the policy of no nuclear weapons, are clear, other things will depend on the party that will be in government after independence? What will be the Labour Party’s plans after independence?

Will the member give way?

I thank Patricia Ferguson for raising the issue. In Glasgow, we are fortunate to have the rail network that we have. Many other European cities have more extensive metro systems, but not many can match our heavy rail system. When we put the two together, we have a network to be proud of. We should be grateful to the Victorians who built it and to others, including SPT, who have maintained it, fought for it and sought to develop it. Speaking personally, I can say that my preferred method of travel is train. I almost invariably use the train to go down to London and the longest journey that I ever made on the train was from Hong Kong to Glasgow. More recently, it has been great to see developments such as the Airdrie to Bathgate line, which has not been given the attention or praise that it deserves. In fact, the name Airdrie to Bathgate can be something of a misnomer, because the line has opened up stations in Glasgow, particularly in the east end—six of which are in my constituency—by giving us a direct link to places such as Bathgate, Edinburgh Park, Haymarket and Waverley. It is therefore disappointing to think that any station might be closed. I am particularly concerned about Duke Street, which is just outside my constituency. I agree with the points that Paul Martin made about it. I remember from economics lectures reference being made to some of the mistakes that Beeching made in his cuts. One was to close small branch lines while forgetting that the passengers from those branch lines were what made the main lines more viable. It strikes me that one of the dangers of closing quieter stations in Glasgow would be to reduce passengers on a wider range of lines and get people out of the habit of using the train as their first choice. I certainly hope that the homework on passenger numbers has been done properly. When I served on SPT, it was notoriously difficult to know how many passengers were using trains or particular stations. For example, many passengers use High Street station in my constituency, which is just on the edge of the city centre. People use it because it is not gated and, therefore, it is quite likely that they will be able to get off there without buying a ticket. Have the Duke Street to High Street journeys been included properly? Duke Street is also the closest station to Parkhead’s Forge retail park, which is the major shopping centre in my constituency. It also happens to be the closest station to my office. I am delighted that Dalmarnock station is getting major investment and an upgrade for the Commonwealth games. That will be a lasting legacy for our area. However, it should not be a reason for closing other stations. In fact, not only do I not want stations to close, I want more to open. The top of my list would be Parkhead Forge, which is also on the Airdrie to Bathgate line. It would not only serve the shopping centre but give a direct service to Celtic Park from the city centre and from Edinburgh. I add my voice to calls for crossrail in due course. Capital investment is tight and my priority would be for housing over rail, but I find it a little ironic that the line across the river exists and is used by empty passenger trains. Even without new tracks or stations, trains can run from Paisley to Edinburgh via Bellgrove, Springburn and—ironically—Duke Street. Let us think long and hard before we close any stations on the Glasgow network and let us work to determine how we can further expand Glasgow’s and Scotland’s excellent railway system.

The member has been talking about capital expenditure. Does he accept that one power that we do not currently have but which we could have is borrowing power, which every council has, and which would create jobs?

I have some sympathy with the member’s view that we need to invest in housing. I presume, though, that such investment can be made only if other investment—in, say, the Forth replacement crossing—is reduced.

I will do my best, Presiding Officer. Although there are a number of issues to discuss, I want to begin with a subject on which the Finance Committee has spent a lot of time: preventative spending. It is estimated that something like 40 to 45 per cent of present Scottish public spending is made in a negative or reactive way and it is essential that all levels of public spending, not just that under the direct control of ministers, become more preventative. That has been made very clear to the Finance Committee, which has built on the previous committee’s work, and particular support is now being given to spending on the early years, where the effect will be greatest. That was touched on in our report and in the debate in December. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s response to that report, especially to paragraph 63. The response says: “The Scottish Government is committed to driving a decisive shift towards prevention, in terms of both public spending and the nature of service delivery.” It says: “We are seeking to encourage those advanced areas to continue to develop experience and evidence, to further innovate and to draw lessons for development of preventative approaches more broadly.” That is particularly to be welcomed. We should share best practice around the country and encourage others to do so. I agree with the cabinet secretary’s comment that “the Government also recognises there may be actions that do not directly involve spend which help to deliver a more preventative approach.” Attitude is important in the area and in the debate. It is not just about particular sums of money, important as they are; it is also about the spirit and the letter of the law. Capital spending has already been touched on. It is clear that capital spending is one means of preventative spending. I completely agree with 95 per cent of what Elaine Murray said about the value of having more homes built. That creates better health, better education and jobs. Like Elaine Murray’s casework, the vast majority of the casework that comes to me in Glasgow Shettleston concerns housing.

The member has said what Ken Macintosh and Elaine Murray have said. Of course we would all like to see more money going into housing, but all those members have failed to say where that money will come from. We are dealing with a limited budget.

I understand that we still have to hear what all the consequentials, which are welcome, will go to in due course. I assume that the members whom I mentioned have a plan to reallocate money within the existing budget that we know about. They and I are aware of many projects. I do not know whether they agree with Alison Johnstone of the Greens, who has just left the chamber, that the Forth replacement crossing should go. Young as I look, I remember the Forth road bridge being built, and I find it desperately disappointing that we must divert such huge amounts of money to replace it, but I think that we all—or most of us—agree that having that bridge is absolutely necessary for Scotland, especially the east coast. I would like to hear from Opposition members whether that bridge, some railway or something else should not happen in order that houses can be built. Depending on what the suggestion is, I would consider supporting them, as I would like to see more housing. However, we need specific suggestions.

I am sorry, but I have already taken two interventions. Let us remember that we are suffering and susceptible to the Westminster cuts. I agree with Unison, which said in its briefing to us: “There is no doubt that the cuts to public spending by the UK Government mean real cuts in the money available to the Scottish Government and has therefore limited their choices.” Linked to capital spending is the fact that we need more powers to give us more control over our budget. In particular, we need more control over corporation tax.

I am sorry, but I really cannot. Enterprise areas have been mentioned. They are welcome, but previously the enterprise zones were beneficial because of the capital allowance and corporation tax breaks that they got. If we had power over that, we could create more jobs more effectively. Borrowing powers have been mentioned several times. Another key area is the possibility of our incorporating into the budget the Department for Work and Pensions and benefits system. Currently, if the living wage cuts tax credits, that saving goes to the DWP and not to here. I realise that I have run out of time. John Swinney has had a very difficult task in the face of the economic failure at Westminster. We can support the budget, and we will see what costed and funded amendments the Opposition parties bring forward.

I thank Stewart Maxwell for raising this matter. The Holocaust Educational Trust makes it clear that the people who suffered during the Holocaust included gays, blacks and Roma Gypsies as well as, overwhelmingly, the Jews. In September 2009, along with Jo Swinson, I was a guest of the trust on a visit to Auschwitz-Birkenau with a group of Glasgow pupils and journalists. Such journeys involve a day of preparation before the visit and a debriefing and school projects afterwards. Different things affect people on the visits. One of the journalists on our visit was struck by a pair of shoes among the pile of shoes because he had a little girl and realised that the shoes would have fitted her. I was challenged in different ways, one of which related to the position of Roma Gypsies in our society today. Frankly, some people still despise that group—as they did then—and would not want to live next to them. The visit brought it home to me that, in some ways, attitudes have not changed very much. The physical aspect of the camp that struck me most was the railway, which has been mentioned by Annabelle Ewing. Some members will know that I am a fan of railways and like travelling by train. Most railways are built for good purposes, although they might occasionally be used for bad ones. However, the railway in the camp, which was built with the sole purpose of killing people more quickly, struck me as particularly awful. It was built to get the Hungarian Jews into the camps as quickly as possible quite late on in the war. The last thing that I did on my visit was walk along that railway track. I have visited other sites—including Terezin, near Prague, and Yad Vashem, in Israel—which I also found overwhelming. The Jews were not the sole victims of the Holocaust, although they were the largest group to suffer. As the Holocaust Educational Trust is good at reminding us, we should oppose all discrimination against all minorities. The Jews have suffered a lot historically. Back in biblical times, they were treated as slaves in Egypt. They were expelled from Rome during the Roman empire. In 1290, England became the first European country to expel Jews—a situation that lasted until 1656. They were expelled from Spain in 1492 and from Portugal in 1497. It has been said that Scotland is the only European country not to have exercised state persecution of Jews, but Stewart Maxwell reminded us that anti-Semitism is—sadly—alive here as well. Why have the Jews been subject to so much hatred historically? There are superficial reasons—for example, the Jews killed Jesus, but Jesus was Jewish, too. All Jesus’s early followers were Jewish, and the whole early Christian church was Jewish. What are the lessons to be learned from the Holocaust? One is that we need to be peacemakers and not just peacekeepers. It is difficult to separate the Jews from Israel. Some Jews oppose the current existence of Israel, and many oppose particular policies of the Israeli Government. However, I fear that, for some people, being anti-Israel on the surface can be a cover for being anti-Jewish underneath. On the home front, we need to learn to treat minorities better, including the Jews, disabled people, gay folk, those who are in poverty and other groups. On the foreign front, a lesson to be learned is how to deal with the middle east. It is easy to be a strident supporter of one side or the other, but surely one role for us in this country would be to be peacemakers in the middle east.

I agree with Sarah Boyack that registration is a problem. Having been a member of Glasgow City Council, I must give the council its due as it has done a lot of work on registration, but it has struggled to get the figures up. Does Sarah Boyack know of any specific ways in which registration could be improved?

Will the member give way on that point?

My apologies—I learned bad lessons in another place. Does Margaret Mitchell accept that the lack of understanding of STV has been overstated? There were fewer spoiled papers in the STV vote than in the parliamentary vote, certainly in Glasgow. Many people already use STV in elections for things such as pension funds and unions.

I think that all members agree on the importance of local government, and I think that the electorate agrees on that, too. Councils have a remit on many of the issues that concern people, such as council tax, housing—in many places—schools, roads, planning, refuse collection, licensing and parks. The list goes on. I have had the privilege of being in Glasgow City Council chamber, at Westminster and here, and I have no doubt that councillors are generally at least as hard working as other politicians are and are often underpaid. I am glad that this year’s local government elections will take place on their own day, but we must not forget the bad old days.

I was going to touch on that later. For now, I will just say that in the short term we are constrained because the public would not accept a pay increase, but we need to look at that in the longer term, so the member has a point. My experience of council elections came first in 1998, when I was elected to Glasgow City Council, which had only one other councillor who had been elected for the SNP—our own, dear Kenneth Gibson. In 1999, I was elected again, this time with his mother, and then there were two of us. In 2003, we reached the fabulous achievement of having three SNP councillors in the city. To touch on a point that Neil Findlay made earlier, during the time when I was a Glasgow city councillor, the Labour group attempted to claim that 100 per cent of the executive of Glasgow City Council should be Labour, with no opposition councillors whatever. I protested against that by sitting in the lord provost’s chair and got suspended for nine months. We need to give due thanks to the Liberal Democrats, who forced the introduction of STV. Thanks to that, in 2007 we achieved an SNP group of 22 councillors. Unfortunately, Liberal Democrat members are not here to hear my compliments. The Liberal Democrats forced Labour to accept PR, much against its will, and it is disappointing that their colleagues at Westminster did not manage to force similar concessions from the Tories but settled merely for an AV referendum. STV is clearly the best system. It means that all councillors have equal footing, compared with the slightly flawed system that we have here at Holyrood with two different ways of being elected. As I said earlier, I think that there is a pretty good understanding of how STV works, especially when it is the only system that is being used on a particular day. However, some areas of the system could be improved, and we will have suggested some of those in the past. First, a five-member ward would have been more proportionate and would have helped smaller parties. Not many of those are represented here today, either. A second issue is by-elections. At the moment, in a three-member ward where, say, party A has two seats and party B has one seat, and the party B member dies, the likelihood is that the main party, A, will win the third seat as well. We then end up with a ward where 100 per cent of the seats are held by one party. That was not the intention. We could say, for example, that the replacement councillor should be from the same party as the one whose seat has been lost—or an independent if that was the case—or that the by-election should take account of existing councillors. I accept that a tidy solution is difficult, but we need to consider the matter at some stage in the future. Another aspect of elections that we would like to improve is giving 16 and 17-year-olds a vote, but that is outwith our power. I look forward to May’s elections and hope that the SNP becomes the largest party in Glasgow. However, to achieve that, we need to increase turnout, which is a long-standing problem for us in Scotland at different levels. The fact that we have a separate day for the elections is very worth while. That was opposed long and hard by certain other parties—partly, to be fair, on grounds of turnout. Part of the answer on turnout would be to give councillors the respect that they are due; perhaps we do not always do that. The public have a tendency to look at it as a hierarchy, with MPs at the top, MSPs next and councillors down below that, with members of the European Parliament totally lost somewhere. Having been in the first three of those positions, I do not agree that that hierarchy reflects reality. We have made some inroads into the issue of respect, especially by ending ring fencing, which gives councillors a lot more autonomy. When the minister and I were both councillors travelling to Convention of Scottish Local Authorities meetings, we asked endlessly for ring fencing to be ended, and doing it is a big achievement for the SNP Government. There is no point in having elections to local government if councillors cannot make their own decisions. However, more must be done in all parties. We could allow councillors to take more of a lead on media issues, for example. MSPs have tended to barge in on what are largely council matters; indeed, I have been guilty of that myself. As I have said, we also need at some stage to think about paying councillors better. I consider the gap between the £16,500 paid to a councillor and the £57,000 paid to one of us to be too wide. That kind of pay limits the number of people who can afford to be councillors, especially those who need to take on the role full time.

The minister is absolutely right to talk about circumstances, because certainly that is the current situation, but I think that in the longer term we need to think about redressing the balance. Finally, councils need to be responsible for more of their finances. Nevertheless, there are positive things to highlight. For example, the relationship between Glasgow and the Government over the Commonwealth games has been very positive, and I trust that that will continue.

I agree with the member that there is a problem in that regard, but does he have a solution? We have struggled with the issue. For example, random naming, which has been done by some pension funds, is quite confusing.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to support the building of more social rented housing in the east end of Glasgow. (S4O-00591)

Does the minister agree that, as well as producing houses, house building is very good for producing jobs because it is labour intensive and creates jobs and apprenticeships?

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that we are talking about one of the most important decisions that Scotland has had to make and that it is therefore worth spending time on it and thinking about how we will deal with the economy, defence and all the other issues?

It has been a privilege to serve on the Finance Committee over the months since May, and especially to be the deputy convener. It has been a challenge for all of us to keep up with Kenneth Gibson’s work rate—woe betide anyone who does not turn up to the committee on time. Some people think that he has a particularly robust style, but we have to accept that he has kept us on track and that we have got through a huge amount of evidence. We have ended up with a robust report, which members have before them today. The committee has not shirked dealing with the difficult issues that have come from all sides, and it is interesting to note that many of the issues that have been raised this afternoon by all sides are already in the report. It has been an interesting time—especially because of the huge emphasis that has been placed on preventative spending. Many members mentioned it this afternoon. Ken Macintosh said that the report had “pulled its punches”. As Jamie Hepburn said, that is a bizarre notion when we consider the wording of some of the recommendations. I also slightly question Gavin Brown’s assertion that Kenneth Gibson is “statesmanlike”. It was an unusual comment, but there we go. I noted that Willie Rennie said that it was a “very thorough” report.

Mr Macintosh and his party’s members on the committee failed to explain their alternatives. Because of that, I assume that Labour would cut the budget for universities severely in order to give more to the colleges. We stand to be corrected on that, but it seems that we can make that assumption. In his opening remarks, the convener made various points about how we face a budget in which revenue is being cut by 12 per cent, and capital by 32 per cent. He also mentioned preventative spending, the need to emphasise leadership, prioritisation, collaborative working and financial challenges. It is encouraging to note that that will inform the committee’s programme through to 2016. Mark McDonald gave some good examples of preventative spending. I was encouraged by many of the cabinet secretary’s comments. He said that the committee’s report was a “balanced and thorough analysis” and that it “challenges the Government”. We welcome the fact that he will write to the committee by January to give a bit more detail. He repeated the call for the UK Government to stimulate the economy. As Paul Wheelhouse said, there is a huge emphasis throughout both the budget and the committee’s report on economic recovery. I find it strange that Margaret McCulloch said that the budget does not emphasise economic recovery. After the initial chapter in the “Scottish Spending Review 2011 and Draft Budget 2012-13” on the strategic context, chapter 2 is entitled, “Accelerating Economic Recovery”. That is clearly central to the budget and to all that we are thinking about. Gavin Brown talked about the outcome report, which is noted in paragraph 76 of the Finance Committee’s report. In relation to John Swinney’s comments on preventative spending, we are all enthusiastic about it. The question that the committee has asked is how it will be turned into practice. Patrick Harvie made that point when he said, “If it can be made to work”. Ken Macintosh accepted that there has been a tight financial settlement and that we have to prioritise jobs, growth and education; I think that we all agree with that. He also mentioned capital spending, which the committee deals with in paragraphs 31 and 32. I felt that at times Mr Macintosh was getting a bit away from what the report says, but that is fair enough.

I have taken an intervention already and I am tight for time. Gavin Brown mentioned the previous experience of preventative spending. That experience is why there are so many recommendations on it in the report, which focuses on the issue from paragraph 83 through to paragraph 149. Anne McTaggart talked about fuel poverty and the cabinet secretary also mentioned it. We must take all the committee reports along with the main budget and the Finance Committee report, because clearly we could not repeat all the statements that are made in the reports, although we agree with many of them. Some speeches, such as Clare Adamson’s, were useful in widening out the issue and showing that even culture, tourism, equalities issues and accident prevention are to do with preventative spending and have long-term benefit. Rob Gibson made an extremely good speech. He talked about rural affairs, climate change and the environment. We could never spend enough time talking about those issues but, as he said, climate change is certainly a preventative spending exemplar. Neil Findlay referred to the council tax freeze, in an intervention. My understanding is that many of my constituents and many people throughout Scotland, especially pensioners, welcome it. I agree with Patrick Harvie’s comments that housing and further education must continue to be huge priorities. I will move on to other subjects that were raised. Non-domestic rates have been a huge issue, which came up in a number of speeches. The projection is that there will be a 13.5 per cent real-terms increase in non-domestic rates by 2014-15. Ken Macintosh asked whether the forecasts are a bit optimistic, Gavin Brown made a similar comment and Elaine Murray asked, “can we be certain”? Frankly, there is nothing in the future of which we can be completely certain, but we need to challenge all those things. The committee says that in its report, particularly in paragraphs 44 and 45, which emphasise that the Scottish Government should come back to the Finance Committee on those issues. I do not have time to touch on the challenge function. Capital spending has been mentioned a fair bit in the debate and the committee makes strong recommendations on the issue in paragraphs 162 and 163. Chic Brodie talked about the importance of assets and their maintenance. That valid point was also made by Mary Scanlon, not least in relation to information and communications technology, although I think that the big problems with ICT have been south of the border, rather than in Scotland. The committee welcomes the fact that there will be no compulsory redundancies and hopes that there could be pay increases in the public sector in the future. In many ways preventative spending has been the theme of the debate. I would love to spend more time on it, but clearly I cannot. I therefore conclude by commending the Finance Committee report to Parliament. May I wish you, Presiding Officer, and all colleagues a very happy Christmas.

When I was elected as the MSP for Glasgow Shettleston earlier this year, I thought that one of the many privileges of that position was to be the MSP for many of the Commonwealth games sites, including Celtic Park, which will host the opening ceremony, the games village, the velodrome, the national indoor sports arena, Glasgow green, which will host the hockey, and Tollcross, which will host the swimming. Winning the bid for the games was a partnership success. It was especially a partnership between the Scottish Government and Glasgow City Council, and we should pay tribute to Alex Salmond, Steven Purcell and others who worked together for that. The games’ success and legacy also depend on a partnership approach. We need the Government, the council, Glasgow Life, the private sector, the third sector and volunteers all to work together. The legacy is about more than the physical venues, as has been mentioned. On the other hand, the physical venues are essential to it. Several of them will be in use before the games or have already been in use. All must be in use after the games. Local people and people throughout Scotland have the opportunity for employment in building the facilities and operating them afterwards. They will also have the opportunity to watch the world-class events that will happen during the two weeks of the games and the opportunity to use the facilities before and after that. I will comment on some of the venues that are in Glasgow Shettleston. First, Celtic Park is already in place, as many members know, and does not have to be built. The big advantage of using it for the opening ceremony is that the athletes living in the athletes village will be within yards of the ceremony. In some other such big events, the athletes have not gone to the opening ceremony because of travel problems and the disruption to their preparations. That is the first big plus. The second venue that I will mention is the athletes village itself. The buildings are just now beginning to take shape on the ground. Outside the chamber a few weeks ago, members saw models of how the site will look and parts of the buildings, much of which are being created off site and brought on site. As the minister said, after the games, we will end up with 1,400 homes in the area, some 300 of which will be social rented housing that will be operated by three different housing associations. That is good news. On top of that, there will be private housing and a council care home for 120 residents. Thirdly, we have the velodrome, which is perhaps one of the most dramatic and exciting buildings. I saw around it recently and it is certainly coming on well. Its future use presents a big challenge. The cross-party group on sport had Eamonn O’Rourke up from Manchester recently to tell us some of the lessons that can be learned from there, as running the velodrome there was a challenge for the city. One of the good points about the velodrome is its location: it is beside other facilities and is not isolated, as has been the case in some other cities. Also, the velodromes in Glasgow, London and Manchester are working together so that, when one of them bids for an event in future, they will not compete with one another. That is extremely positive. The velodrome will open in October or November next year. We are due to have the world youth track event in 2013. The national indoor sports arena, where we will have sports such as athletics and basketball, is the other half of the same building. It is important that there will also be community facilities, plus the headquarters of Scottish sporting bodies, such as Cycling Scotland. The hockey arena at Glasgow green is another big plus, as it will be the only hockey facility in Scotland with covered seating. Scottish Hockey is extremely keen to be involved in running it in the future. The sixth venue that I will mention is the swimming pools at Tollcross. We already have a top-class pool there, but there can be tensions between the competitive swimmers and those who just want a leisurely swim. Having two pools means that we will be able to win competitions because we will have a warm-up pool and a main pool; it also means that those two groups can operate together and not compete with each other. As I list those venues, I find it breathtaking to think about all the different sports facilities, and there are others spread across the country. On top of that, non-sporting infrastructure is being built. I will comment finally on the legacy, which will be a big topic in the debate. From my perspective, the main essentials are that the facilities must be available to local people at affordable rates. I spoke to Glasgow Life this week—Bridget McConnell does tremendous work there—and was told that it will treat those venues like other venues, so people who are members of the Glasgow club will get access to them without having to pay on the day. Linked to that is that people from all over Scotland will be able to attend the games. I hope that it will be possible to have tickets that allow entry to games facilities, travel within Glasgow and entry to some cultural events. The third aspect is volunteering. We need some 15,000 volunteers. I had not realised that volunteers travel round the world to these events. We certainly welcome those volunteers. I thank members across the parties who have supported the games in this session of Parliament and the previous one.

Will the member give way?

7. To ask the Scottish Government when a decision will be made regarding the location of the headquarters of the proposed single police force. (S4O-00485)

Does the minister accept that, whatever the national position is, there will be a need for a major office in Glasgow and the west of Scotland and that an early move from Pitt Street to, perhaps, Dalmarnock would be a cost saving and a boost for the local area?

Does not what the member has just said prove the need for the legislation? Obviously, the football authorities have felt, rightly or wrongly, that they could not control the issue because it has been so big. Surely that is why the Parliament needs to get involved.

The member seems to be suggesting that wider work is not going on but, in the schools in my area, incredibly good work is going on. Does the member agree that wider work is going on and that we should be debating an addition to that rather than downgrading it?

Will the member give way?

The living wage is important, but does the member accept that, although a living wage is good, a minimum wage is better, because it affects the private sector as well?

There are many aspects to youth unemployment, and one that we are focusing on this morning is what the Government can do by spending money and creating jobs through investment. Formerly, as a councillor, and now, as an MSP, I have seen Glasgow City Council and the Scottish Government make big efforts to do those things, but it would be simplistic to say that the Government, the councils or any other public bodies have a magic wand with which to solve the problems immediately. They are too complex simply to have money thrown at them, important though money is. Many good things are happening in my area, the east end of Glasgow. We have the Commonwealth games, with a huge new building that includes the velodrome and the indoor sports arena. The building has an exceptionally large, complex roof, which was put on by a local company. It required a specialised, trained workforce, however, and the company was unable to take on just any local person, young or otherwise, to do that work. Another major project in my area is the Clyde Gateway urban regeneration company, which has a target of creating 20,000 jobs over the next 20 years. That will certainly include jobs for many young people. Those are good things, but it is not always as easy as just putting money into buildings.

The college that serves the east end is John Wheatley College. I am hugely supportive of it and of helping to get people who are further away from the job market towards jobs. I am disappointed that all areas of our economy, including the colleges, are having their budgets cut. I do not know whether Labour is suggesting that the universities are getting too much and the colleges too little and that, therefore, the universities’ budgets should be cut in order to give more to the colleges. In the past week, I have met representatives of the six Glasgow federation colleges and the City of Glasgow College, and I think that the jury is still out with regard to how much money can be saved by regionalisation. Clyde Gateway and Glasgow community safety services have had places for apprenticeships but have struggled to get young people to fill them. When I was recruiting staff, I thought that it would be a good idea to take on a young person, in conjunction with Clyde Gateway and Action for Children, which would pay half of the minimum wage of any 16 to 18-year-old whom I took on. For that age group, the minimum wage is £3.68 an hour, half of which is £1.84. I had to make that up to £7.20 an hour to give a living wage, but I felt that it was good to do that. I was expecting Clyde Gateway to give me a list of young people, but it was able to give me only one name. That young person was pleasant enough. They were quite quiet. They were not happy about speaking to people a great deal and they were not very happy about speaking on the telephone. However, we were prepared to work around that and support them in a way that would move things forward. It became apparent that nobody else in the young person’s household was working, so there was a bit of a question mark over whether they were used to the ethos of going out to work, as many of us remember our parents doing. It is difficult to break that down. The question is whether we have enough sympathetic employers—which I hope that I was trying to be—who will try to bring a young person out of that environment and into a working situation. A problem developed with attendance: unfortunately, in the first five weeks, the person did not turn up 25 per cent of the time. Sometimes we were told that they would not be there and sometimes we were not. We—my office manager and Clyde Gateway folk—sat down with the young person and talked to them about the issue. They seemed to understand, and we went through the various procedures, but, again, they did not turn up.

I have already given way, so I think that I am going to have to press on. At that stage, the human resources folk in the Parliament and Clyde Gateway were telling me that I would be justified in terminating the young person’s employment. I thought that I should give them one more chance. A week past Monday, I was expecting to see them again to give them that final chance but, unfortunately, they did not turn up. That is not the only example of such a situation. A local baker in my constituency wanted to recruit a local person but could not find someone who was prepared to get up early enough in the morning, so they recruited a French person instead. [Interruption.] I am trying to widen out the issue in order to highlight the fact that many factors—and many organisations—are involved in youth unemployment. For example, is the family supportive enough? If not, is the school able to break the generational cycle of not working? Have schools placed too much emphasis on the academic in the past? I suggest that, sometimes, they perhaps have. Clearly, the colleges are a player, as has been mentioned. During consultation, there was a suggestion that the SNP Government was placing too much emphasis on young people at the expense of older people.

Is the Labour motion suggesting that we need to move more resources away from older people and towards younger people? I think that older people will suffer if we do that.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what work it carries out with the African diaspora in Scotland when developing its aid programme. (S4O-00439)

I thank the minister for his reply, particularly given the extremely interesting session that we had on the matter at the last meeting of the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on international development. In view of the Government’s commitment, is the minister able to outline when the next Malawi and Africa funding rounds will be announced?

Does Gavin Brown accept that there is a huge difference in life expectancy between richer areas and poorer areas, and that it will hit the poorer people particularly hard if we increase the pension age?

The member makes the point that the UK Government is unwilling to go down that route. Does he agree that if we were to move towards complete separation of church and state—as I believe we should—that would remove the problem, because the problem is with the Church of England?

I note the point that Michael McMahon is making, but I wonder whether anyone is guaranteed funding at this time. Surely, when the budget has been cut so severely by Westminster, the starting point is that everything is being cut.

There are many aspects to regeneration. Many factors have been mentioned this afternoon and I am sure that others will be mentioned. Members have talked about job creation, youth unemployment, housing and colleges. We face many challenges at a time when the Scottish budget is being cut severely, but while accepting those challenges, we must not forget the past and current successes. I will concentrate on my constituency. Most people would accept that the east end of Glasgow has particular challenges, but we have seen some significant progress. The first area that I will touch on is transport. The M74 was completed on time and on budget and it is estimated that there is potential for 20,000 jobs to be brought to the wider area because of that motorway. Being built at the moment and linked in with the M74 is the east end regeneration route, which is under construction just yards from my constituency office. That will link up more of the east end with the wider motorway network. Both Glasgow City Council and the Scottish Government deserve to be congratulated on the progress that has been made on those roads. Public transport, too, is being boosted in my area, with the Airdrie to Bathgate rail line giving new links. It is worth saying that many of the transport projects benefit much wider areas than just the areas in which they are built. The M74 benefits Renfrewshire, Lanarkshire and many other areas, and similarly, the railway is of great benefit to the east end of Glasgow. As I travel, I see students who are now able to attend a wider variety of courses because of that railway line. Dalmarnock station is receiving a £10 million upgrade with funding from the Scottish Government, Glasgow City Council, Clyde Gateway URC, Strathclyde partnership for transport and European money. One reason why a number of those things are happening in the east end of Glasgow is to give better access to the Commonwealth games site, which brings me to my second topic. The fact that the Commonwealth games are coming to Scotland is a tremendous success for Scotland. We talk about the legacy of the games and what it will mean. It means different things to different people. For example, we hope that it will mean that folk exercise more and their health improves. From my point of view, the main legacy will be the physical legacy of the buildings that will continue to exist after the games. The village and four of the main venues will be in Glasgow Shettleston. That will create the opportunity for local people to watch sport, but also the opportunity for them to take part and use the facilities afterwards.

That strikes me as a slightly bizarre suggestion. The Commonwealth games will benefit the whole of Scotland and raise our profile in the world. I would think that one of the areas that Inverclyde should be moving forward on is tourism. It is doing that, as far as I am aware. A boost to Scottish tourism should therefore be a boost to Inverclyde. One advantage of the Commonwealth games, like the Olympics, is that lesser-known sports get more of a profile. One of those is hockey. I am grateful to Scottish Hockey for inviting me to be its guest at the recent dinner to mark 1,000 days until the Commonwealth games. Not only will the top hockey pitches in Scotland come to the east end of Glasgow, but Scottish Hockey will move its headquarters to Glasgow Green. That is an example of a long-term commitment that will give the area a real boost. It is real regeneration as far as I am concerned. I should also mention the athletes village. The houses there will not have kitchens because the athletes will not need to cook, but after the games are over, kitchens will be fitted and a considerable number of new houses will be made available. There will be 300 social rented houses and a 120-bed care home that will be run by the council, which will allow older people to stay in the area, in the one building, as their situation changes. There will also be a considerable number of houses for sale. There will also be jobs in building the facilities and running them later on; 620 jobs, including 84 apprenticeships, will be linked to the village. I understand that this week Nicola Sturgeon visited CCG (Scotland) Ltd, which is making timber frames for the housing. One of the employees there, Paul Doherty, said: “After a lengthy period without work, I was fortunate enough to be given the opportunity to be taken on at the CCG off-site manufacturing plant back in August 2010. I’m not exaggerating when I say that my life has been transformed as a result. I’m very proud to be living proof that Clyde Gateway really is making a difference across our communities.” That leads me on to my third and final topic, Clyde Gateway. I declare an interest in that I have been trying, through Clyde Gateway, to employ a young person who would not normally be getting a job, so I have a link with it in that way. Clyde Gateway has been doing some tremendous things. Transport has been mentioned already, and Clyde Gateway’s work spans Rutherglen and South Lanarkshire as well as Glasgow, preparing derelict and contaminated land for business use, which has been a tremendous success. The M74 has opened up many new sites that can be used for businesses. Glasgow community and safety services is moving to Bridgeton to the new Eastgate building, which will be home to about 500 staff. I hope, too, that the police offices in Pitt Street might be able to move to Dalmarnock, where a site is ready for them. I understand that such a move would immediately save on running costs and that such a building would be needed both by Strathclyde Police and by the new national police force, so that decision should not be too much of a factor. On a more general point, we cannot stress enough the importance of house building. Just yesterday I was at the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations finance conference in Crieff, at which people emphasised the important impact that house building has on the economy and on health, saving fuel and education. While I am enthusiastic about transport projects, I have to say that if money is tight we should emphasise housing. We face a challenging financial climate, as the motion states, but let us not downplay what has been achieved and is being achieved by this Government.

I congratulate Dave Thompson on securing the debate. I am slightly disappointed, however, that only two parties are represented as the chamber discusses what I believe to be an important subject. We should pay tribute to the organisations whose aim is to make the Bible widely available in this country and overseas, including the Bible societies; Scripture Union, through which I came to personal faith; and the Gideons, who have presented me and, I am sure, many others with a New Testament such as the one that I am holding. I thought that it might be useful to dispel a couple of myths or misunderstandings about the Bible and the Christian faith. The first is that, as some people think, the Bible is a set of rules and that we please God by obeying those rules. That is not quite true because, primarily, the Christian faith is about a relationship. We believe that, when God made the world, he had a close relationship with human beings, that that relationship was broken and that the reason why Jesus came was to restore that relationship. It seems appropriate to read a verse out of the Bible in this debate. One I like, which I thought I would read, is part of Jesus’s prayer in John, chapter 17, verse 3: “Now this is eternal life: that they may know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom you have sent.” Jesus was emphasising the fact that a relationship is our highest aim in the Christian faith: to know God as our father. The Bible shows us how we should live when we have that relationship. Another misunderstanding of the Bible is that God in the Old Testament is very harsh but in the New Testament is somehow different and more loving. When we look at the Bible we see that God is portrayed as loving all the way through, not just to his people but to all human beings. One story I find particularly moving is that of Jonah. Members might be aware that he was the one who was swallowed by the whale. God tells Jonah to go to an evil city called Nineveh to warn the people that they will be punished. Jonah goes and preaches and they turn to God. The result is that God is very pleased, but Jonah is very angry. That is a perhaps slightly amusing example of how the Bible often tells us that the prophets were imperfect human beings. At the end of that book, God shows that he is concerned about all the people, not just the Jews, and about the wider creation, even including the animals. In the final verse of that book, God says to Jonah: “But Nineveh has more than 120,000 people who cannot tell their right hand from their left, and many cattle as well. Should I not be concerned about that great city?” I find that tremendously encouraging and moving, because I believe that that is also a message for today. Just as God cared for Nineveh, he cares for the great cities of Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen and Dundee and all the smaller ones, too. I find that message from the Bible tremendously encouraging.

I thank the cabinet secretary for what she has already said, but could she reassure people who are thinking of responding to the consultation that doing so is worth while and that the Government certainly has not made up its mind on how to proceed?

Does the member accept that one of the problems in Glasgow has been that more and more developments have been crammed into every little space in the west end? If we restricted development in the west end, that might help brownfield sites in other parts of the city.

The Glasgow transport museum, which is an iconic building, cost somewhere between £70 million and £100 million. For the same money, we could have had a simpler building and been able to replace some of our primary schools. How do we tie up having iconic buildings and suchlike with being able to spread the money around a bit more?

Because they are scared.

I suggest to the member that she is scared to take action.

I very much applaud the member’s support for community councils, which I am also enthusiastic about. Does he think that there would be problems in areas that do not have community councils, of which there are a number in my constituency?

Does the member agree that, at a time when we are short of money, the public would not be happy for us to spend millions and millions of pounds on snowploughs that might sit idle for perhaps 15 years at a time?

It is exceptionally friendly in the chamber this afternoon. Last winter, many of us suffered disruption to our travel plans. I am happy to accept that those of us who live in cities have more options, one of which is walking between places, especially as many of us live closer to our place of work and so on. People in cities such as Glasgow perhaps suffered less than people in other areas. Nevertheless, on the worst day of the winter last year, I started my journey into the city centre by bus, but we did not get far. I then went to the nearest train station and, lo and behold, a train appeared and I got to my destination okay. I got home by bus in the evening. Perhaps unwisely, I went out again in the evening and waited quite a long time for a train, but to be fair, it came. I was ready to walk home when a bus came along and got me home. Whatever else we do, we must pay tribute to the bus and train drivers and other staff who kept as much of the system going as they could last winter. Also on a positive note, we do not compare badly with other countries. I have visited one or two. In January a few years ago, I went to Budapest, which as members may know is a city in Hungary. People there are used to slightly colder winters than we usually get, but there were fairly icy pavements to start with, then there was rain, which subsequently froze, and they could not cope with that at all. The pavements especially, but also the roads, were unbelievably treacherous. Another city that I spent some time in for a couple of years is London, which as members may know is a city in England. On one occasion, there was a little snow—by our standards, it was pretty minimal. I was in the House of Commons that day, but it had to stop early because it could not cope with a little snow. The whole city practically ground to a halt, including the buses and the underground. Some of us thought that the snow did not go underground, but I learned that it obviously does. When I was a councillor in Glasgow, I would come out and almost immediately, if there had been snow, the area in front of the city chambers and the main parts of the pedestrian precincts would have been cleared, but when I came out of the House of Commons in London, nothing had been done. There was snow everywhere and it was treacherous and slippery. It was pretty hopeless. ScotRail was criticised last winter. Since then, and indeed during last winter, it looked at other countries’ systems, including those in the Nordic countries, and it found that there is no magic formula. Even countries that are used to colder winters than ours still struggle. Sometimes they do not have trains running at all and sometimes they use huge amounts of hot water to clear ice from rolling stock, which can be considered wasteful. ScotRail is now at the forefront of finding innovative ways in which to keep rolling stock running. The information flow is important, and I have to say that it has improved. If I heard Jackson Carlaw correctly, he said that there was a complete failure of communication. Frankly, that is over the top, but perhaps that is what we should expect from that quarter. There was certainly not a complete failure of communication. Years ago, when there was a bit of snow, we would stand on a railway station and have no idea of what was going to happen. Now, certainly at many stations in my area, we have electronic information that tells passengers, broadly speaking, how long the train will be delayed for, although I accept that ScotRail does not always get it right.

The member can use strong words if he likes, but I shall try to be more moderate. I do not accept that there was a complete breakdown of communication, but there were problems and struggles. On the night that I stood in my local station of Garrowhill, we were informed that the train would be delayed, but then it was cancelled, so Mr Carlaw is right in that regard. However, as I said, I eventually got a train. There was also the option for ScotRail to use the loudspeaker system to update people on what was appearing electronically. I think that Mr Carlaw must accept that we are well ahead of what happened 30 or 40 years ago in that respect and doing a lot better. It is clear that we need to plan well for winter and that we need to know what to expect. I commend Glasgow City Council for producing its winter maintenance plan for the coming winter and for listing, for example, the priority 1 carriageway routes for treatment, which include bus routes.

Yes; I certainly do not want to overdo my commending of Glasgow City Council. Mr Stewart is right to say that we need to set priorities and that councils need to make them clear. There are sometimes misunderstandings on the part of the public that their pavements might be cleared immediately, whereas the priority must be the roads, the hills and the bus routes. I realise that my time is escaping me. However, last winter when I was between jobs I worked for a charity that was headed up by a Canadian, who was amazed at how poorly prepared individual drivers were here. He told me a number of things about Canada in that regard. For example, he said that virtually every car there has two sets of tyres. In the long run, that does not cost any more, and they are used to changing them at various times. Similarly, every driver in Canada would be expected to carry a shovel, some grit and a candle for warmth, which makes a lot of sense. I mention in passing that I do not think that Stewart Stevenson deserved to have to resign last winter. We need to remember that we are only human beings and that nature is bigger than us. Be it a tsunami in Japan, volcanoes in Iceland, earthquakes in Turkey or exceptionally cold temperatures in Scotland, we will not be ready for everything. It is how we cope with the unexpected that really matters.

Will the member give us a suggestion for some other capital programme that should not go ahead in order to fund housing, such as the Forth road bridge?

It is good to start by remembering some of the achievements of the present and the previous Governments. There are two that I am particularly enthusiastic about: first, the restricting of the right to buy—I am perfectly clear that the reason for my constituents not being able to get the housing that they need is that much of it has been sold off; and secondly, the breaking up of Glasgow Housing Association, on which I again congratulate Alex Neil. Labour said that that was too hard and that it could not do it, but it has now happened. Although I accept that the GHA has improved, I would, in the longer term, like to see it being completely broken up so that local tenants can be in control of all the housing. It has already been stated a number of times how worthwhile housing investment is, but the point is worth reiterating. For example, the briefing from the SFHA says: “The activities of housing associations and co-operatives increase community wellbeing, improve public health, provide a sound basis for educational achievement and reduce poverty and social injustice.” Absolutely. The theme of preventative spending is that if we put money into housing, that will benefit us, the residents and society much more widely. On affordability, which has been mentioned a number of times this morning, CIH Scotland makes in its submission the good and interesting point that “CIH Scotland is working with SFHA and” local authority housing officers “to try to ascertain what capacity councils and housing associations have to build social rented housing at these grant rates over the next 5 years. Notwithstanding what we find, we believe that the Scottish Government should not make assumptions about such subsidy rates being sustainable”. If more of that kind of information can be brought to the table, I am sure that we and the Government will listen to it. However, it sounds like such information is not available at the moment.

I have already partly answered that by pointing out that CIH Scotland and SFHA are undertaking a study on the issue. As for the use of the word “concerns”, I think that we need to be realistic. We are facing huge problems across Europe and around the world. We have concerns about every budget, not just the housing budget, and in any case we are at the mercy of Westminster, which could arbitrarily cut our budget even more and give us even more serious problems. I am very enthusiastic about housing associations, having worked for them a number of times, and understand that the Scottish Housing Regulator is carrying out a review of the way in which they are regulated. The regulator has suggested that committee members should be paid for working for housing associations and that there should be a time limit on membership of such committees. However, housing associations seem to have some reservations about those suggestions, especially the proposal to pay committee members. The east end of Glasgow, for example, has a lot of small local associations to which tenants put in a lot of time. Of course, not every tenant is willing or able to do so and payments for and time limits on committee membership might really change the whole situation. On the limit on capital finance, one solution lies in the Scotland Bill and whether we can get better borrowing powers. Setting some arbitrary limit is not the way to go; instead, we should take the prudential borrowing route, which is open to councils, to allow the Scottish Government to borrow what it can afford to finance and repay. That might give us a bit more flexibility in the capital budget to spend more on housing in particular.

I am happy to say that my personal priority is housing. I see what is happening in my constituency, which has gained hugely from SNP investment in transport with the completion of the M74 and the opening of the new railway from Airdrie to Bathgate and is doing very well from investment in the Commonwealth games. I would certainly put housing and primary schools at the top of my own priority list. The debate’s purpose is to push housing up the agenda. Labour’s top priority would be a rail link to Glasgow airport but, as I have made clear, my top priority is housing.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what the economic and congestion impacts have been on Glasgow and the west of Scotland since the opening of the M74 motorway extension. (S4O-00241)

Do the minister and the Government agree that, although investment in transport remains important, housing should be a top priority in the next five years?

I have a constituency question to ask the First Minister. Are the Commonwealth games facilities that are being built in the east end of Glasgow on time and on budget?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

My constituency is not the most well off in the whole country but the people in it, and those in other constituencies, are realistic about the fact that we face tough times. People know that it is not their fault and that it is not the fault of this Government. They accept that we will go through difficult times and that the pain must be shared around. Over the next few years, a lot of the fight will be on defending our current services, as much as it will be on expanding them as we would like to do. It is easy, as we have heard this afternoon, for Opposition parties just to stand there and criticise some of the cuts, but we have not heard much from them in the way of alternative proposals. One of the main questions for me—certainly today—is how John Swinney’s proposals will affect those who are less well off. I want to be enthusiastic and congratulate John Swinney on the concept of a social wage and some of the factors within that. The first such factor is certainly the council tax freeze, which is tremendous and is extremely popular among my constituents and, I believe, many others. The starting point is that the council tax is a bad tax that we want to get rid of. As Willie Rennie suggested, of course some people could pay a bit more, but the reality is that it is a regressive tax that hits the poorest hardest. Many ordinary people, including pensioners, with a small bit of extra income get hit if we put up council tax. The continuing freeze is therefore a welcome help to many ordinary families.

A local income tax would help poorer people even more. For example, those who do not pay income tax at all would therefore pay no local income tax. In comparison, a couple of pensioners with limited means have to pay the same council tax as the four adults who live next door, in exactly the same kind of house, who all earn good salaries. That is the whole point. We still wait for Labour to give us some alternative to the present unfair council tax system.

It is impossible for us to do anything about it at this time because we are considering the Scotland Bill. We cannot have both the Scotland Bill and new income tax powers coming in. The reality is that, however much we all want it, HM Revenue and Customs has a veto. The second major factor that I welcome within the broad social wage concept is the idea of no compulsory redundancies, which is very positive. Clearly, a pay freeze is difficult for people when we have inflation of 4 or 5 per cent. However, for many of my constituents, if the choice is frozen pay or no pay, most would prefer the former. I welcome the £250 increase for those with an income of under £21,000 and the concept of a living wage that is going up to £7.20 an hour.

Yes. I was not aware of that, but it is extremely disappointing. I know that Kenny Gibson is always right with his facts. If I picked up the Labour Opposition members correctly, they suggest imposing the living wage on all local authorities and on other parts of the public sector. That brings up a fundamental point that that is a centralising approach, which I thought Labour had grown out of. I seem to remember being in Labour—being in labour? I don’t think so. [Laughter.]

The question that I have, which I was just coming on to and which I think Neil Findlay touched on earlier, is that there seems to be a certain inconsistency in Labour’s position. It says that we should impose a living wage on the public sector and just let the private sector go scot free. However, when I was down at Westminster, the Labour Government refused again and again to introduce a proper minimum wage. If we had a proper minimum wage, we would not need to have this discussion about the living wage going to only certain parts of society, which disadvantages the public sector. [Interruption.] I thank Kenny Gibson for another helpful intervention. We also welcome the small business bonus scheme. Some people might think that the scheme just helps big business in some way, but in fact it helps very small-scale shopkeepers. Some shopkeepers in my constituency are struggling against the huge supermarkets that are just down the road. The scheme gives welcome and much appreciated support—tied in, of course, with the business rates supplement that is coming up. Time is going to beat me soon. I welcome—

Thank you. I welcome the policies on free prescriptions, free personal care, concessionary bus travel and higher education. The argument keeps being made that some people could pay for those benefits. People say, “Surely better-off people have to pay.” However, as soon as we start introducing charges the people on the margins get caught out. Pensioners who have just a little extra income have to start paying. I support the Government’s intention to continue to provide those benefits for free. I congratulate John Swinney on presenting such a positive review at such a difficult time.

Will the member give way?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the downside of the living wage is that it does not apply to the private sector, that the real answer must be to look at the low level of the national minimum wage and that power over that should be devolved to Scotland?

Does the member agree that the debate goes much wider than the headline rate? There is also the opportunity to target particular industries or small businesses. That might not cost a lot of money but would be quite effective.

Will the member give way?

I accept the historical account that Willie Rennie has given us, but does he accept that the election in May this year somewhat changed the political landscape in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The headline rate of corporation tax is certainly important and I believe that we can attract business to Scotland by changing the rate, but that is not the only possibility with corporation tax. There is also the possibility of moving rates for all or some businesses and the potential to use capital allowances and other factors to target new businesses, smaller businesses or businesses in certain sectors, such as the video games industry, which might be relatively more important to Scotland than to the rest of the UK. The Scottish Parliament information centre gave us a useful briefing for the debate. I picked up from it the point that, in Canada, the provinces are able to vary research and development incentives, tax credits for certain activities, and so on. We need to understand that such targeting is permissible as long as the opportunity is open to any company that comes to Scotland or is already operating in Scotland. The Scotland Bill Committee has heard some interesting evidence, although our main meeting on corporation tax is not until 27 September. On Tuesday, we heard from the Chartered Institute of Taxation. It undertook a survey of its members in Scotland and gave details of that in its written evidence, which stated, for example, that 59 per cent took the view that “support to SMEs was preferable to cutting the main” corporation tax rate. There is therefore a variety of opinion within the business community as to what is the best way of dealing with corporation tax and changing it. It is much more complex than just taking the headline rate. There was a fair bit of other information in the CIT submission. For example, it stated that the survey asked what would be the most useful of eight options, and annual investment allowances came out top. There is a lot more to this than some of the simplistic arguments that we have heard about changing the headline rate.

That is a tremendous intervention because I was going to touch on that in the rest of my speech. Much of the information that we had this week from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland as well as from the CIT was about minimising cost, keeping the burden down and simplifying things. We have an incredibly complex tax system in this country—not just corporation tax but income tax, national insurance and so on. On that point, I completely agree with what the Green amendment says about widespread avoidance and evasion—Mr Harvie referred to this—which I totally abhor. Is that complexity the responsibility of successive Scottish Governments? I think not. Is it the fault of the UK and UK Governments? Definitely yes. I would also accept some blame on behalf of the accountancy profession for continually looking for loopholes. Let us be clear that the present system costs UK business far too much in administration and taxation, so we need to change that.

I will have to finish because I have only four minutes. We should also note that the motion has the wording “if used wisely”, which are key words. That is why Richard Baker, Willie Rennie and Neil Bibby were all somewhat mistaken. Nobody is saying that we should just chop corporation tax, so that we suddenly have a black hole—of course not. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth will cut or raise corporation tax according to his projections for the Scottish economy and where extra money will come in, not less.

Clearly, one of the most difficult pieces of legislation that we will have is the next finance bill, with the question of the next budget for this Parliament. We face cuts from Westminster of £1.7 billion. It is easy for Jenny Marra to list some of the repercussions of that, but she did not point out that it was her party that got the economy into such a mess. Proportionately, we have even more of a cut in the capital budget, which will be a huge challenge.

I think that, at least, John Swinney’s regulation of the banks would have been considerably better than Gordon Brown’s. It is interesting to note that a small European country called Switzerland has such a strong economy at the moment that it is having to try to keep its currency down, as compared with the UK, which has such a weak economy that the pound has collapsed.

Excuse me a minute, but I think I need to say something. I have only read three lines. One thing that we can be sure of is that there are few lessons to be learned from Westminster. As we have gathered over recent days, the previous Prime Minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer were squabbling over the budget until the last minute. It is clear that our budget process will be handled a lot more professionally. Iain Gray used a phrase—I think that I heard correctly—that was something about the strong, modern United Kingdom. I think that there were some other adjectives in there as well. I am 54 years old: when are we going to see this strong, modern United Kingdom? If members want to go down to Westminster, where I unfortunately was for two years, they will see what is neither strong nor modern. It is clear that on the Finance Committee there is widespread agreement that we should emphasise preventative spending in the coming years. However, there are challenges with that. How do we find the preventative spending when there are acute needs at the same time? Witnesses have told the committee that there can be a quick return from preventative spending, but I fear that there is not always a quick return when we invest in that way. Another challenge is which preventative spending to spend. I spent much of August in my constituency visiting organisations there such as Includem, which does valuable work with difficult teenagers; Quarriers, which supports families and befriends children; and Geeza Break, which provides respite care. All of them argued that if we spent £1 with them, they would save us £4, £7 or £8 in the longer term. Considering the claims for preventative spending and deciding which ones are more solid and would have most impact is a huge challenge for the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth and all the Parliament’s committees. As I mentioned, the capital budget is one of the things that Westminster is cutting most severely for our Parliament. Another group of organisations that I met over the summer was housing associations—I used to work for one or two of them. They put a strong case for investment in housing. We know that better housing means better health and education and that it also creates jobs along the way. I congratulate the previous SNP Government on restricting the right to buy, which has been a huge step in the right direction, as well as on bringing forward capital spending. However, clearly expectations have been raised that that could and would continue. We all, I think, want the maximum number of houses to be available, but some housing associations fear that the strong associations with big resources of their own will be the only ones able to do development. That is another challenge for us. Finance, the spending review and the coming budget are all very much linked to the powers that this Parliament has. I will mention just three of those that we need to look at. First, powers over corporation tax are not just about the headline rate. Much as I respect Annabel Goldie and Patrick Harvie, I believe that they both made a slightly simplistic argument against varying the headline rate of corporation tax, but that is only one part of the powers that we would have. We would also be able to target key industries with better capital allowances. Secondly, we all agree, I am sure, that borrowing must be wise and affordable and that we must not copy Westminster’s reckless policies. However, prudential borrowing has largely worked for councils such as Glasgow and surely provides a better model than a fixed ceiling. Thirdly—and very importantly—we should have control over and involvement in welfare and benefits. How can we set a proper joined-up budget if we do not also have control over benefits? What is the point in helping to create the jobs here by investing if savings on the benefits bill all end up in London? Even if the jobs are there, how can we encourage people into them when the minimum wage is so low? Richard Baker talked about a living wage, but we need to go further than that and introduce a higher minimum wage that all employers must adhere to. The Scotland Bill can be amended if there is political will at Westminster, which I fear is being very timid. Members down there need to do some listening and stop treating Scotland with contempt.

Does James Kelly accept that seeking to delay the bill or such legislation sends out the message that sectarianism is acceptable?

Thank you for the opportunity to take part in the debate. A number of members have asked whether the bill is too rushed. As a person, I tend to be on the cautious side of things—I want to consult, hear people’s views and sleep on a decision before I make it, which sometimes might upset my staff. However, there are times in life when we have to make a point, take action and show that something is really important. I believe that we are in that position now. The opposite danger of going too fast is going too slowly, so that five years from now we are still sitting here talking about these things, with people still having similar concerns. The bill is not the final answer on sectarianism, but it is an attempt to deal with one part of it. It is important that this Parliament states that we are serious about it. Paul Martin said that this is a people’s Parliament. He is correct, but the danger for him is that he is getting out of touch with the people. Even since the election, a number of people in my constituency, which is adjacent to his, have suggested to me that all marches be banned. I do not agree with that, but there is considerable public feeling that we have to do something, not just in the bill but beyond it. Patrick Harvie said that if we get it wrong, we might do more harm than good. He is mistaken on that point. Sometimes we have to try things. They will not always be perfect, but we have to give them a go and we have to be seen to be doing something.

I disagree that we are acting for the sake of acting. We are acting because there is a real problem here and we all believe that we have to deal with it. A number of speakers have raised the issue of who has been fighting hard against sectarianism and who has not. We all have to share some of the blame for not always confronting it at different times. I think I am correct in saying that Donald Gorrie of the Liberal Democrats was the first MSP who really ran with it in the Parliament. I am happy to accept that Jack McConnell did, too. When I was elected to Glasgow City Council, which clearly was not run by my party, sectarianism was not on the agenda—the council was not talking about sectarianism, but we raised the issue at that stage. I want to raise a couple of issues on which I hope that the minister can provide some reassurance—some members have raised them already. The first is resources. Some legislation, such as the smoking ban, has been largely self-policing. However, other legislation, such as that prohibiting the use of mobile phones while driving, has become a joke, because one cannot walk down the street or drive a car without seeing people using a mobile phone while driving. That is a danger with any legislation. I suspect that it would take more resources than we have at our disposal to clamp down on the use of mobile phones. I seek a reassurance from the minister that she is happy that the British Transport Police, for example, have enough resources. When I am on trains in my constituency that pass near Celtic Park—

As the member probably knows, I am not a Partick Thistle fan but a Clyde fan, so I would not want to go anywhere near Partick Thistle. The member is asking the same question that I am asking. I seek from the minister some reassurance about resources. The second point, which is raised in legal advice from the Christian Institute and elsewhere, relates to freedom of expression. Can the minister give us some reassurance that the bill does not need to include a section that guarantees freedom of speech, especially with regard to religious evangelism or proselytising?

I very much agree with what Christina McKelvie says about our commitment, and that we should be helping countries such as Malawi, even though we have a limited budget. I admit, however, that some of my constituents come to me and say, “Well, money’s tight—shouldn’t we just look after Scotland and forget about the rest of the world?” How would Christina McKelvie answer them?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities regarding the implementation of a living wage for staff across local authorities. (S4O-00039)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that if the minimum wage is kept as low as it currently is there will continue to be a longer-term problem, because local government is paying a higher wage rate than the private companies that are competing with it? Will he join me in expressing disappointment with both the Labour and the Conservative Governments at Westminster, which have refused to raise the minimum wage?

Does the First Minister agree that if we are going to attract business and jobs to Scotland, we need a whole package to do so, which includes good education, health and taxation systems? Does he agree with Jim McColl of Clyde Blowers Capital, whose company works around the world in many taxation systems and who says that it has no problem operating in those different systems?

Is the member arguing that, in the long run, a private finance initiative approach makes better sense than the Scottish Futures Trust?

Will the member give way?

Does the member accept that PFI/PPP is an exceptionally expensive way of repaying and is considerably more expensive than a normal loan?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. It is good to be the 15th speaker and not have had to stand up 15 times beforehand to get to speak, as they do at Westminster in one of the strange customs there. In one sense, the ideal would be not to have to borrow at all. If we look across the North Sea at Norway, we see that, in the good times, Norway saved money and then, when it hit the bad times, it had funds to fall back on. It ill becomes David McLetchie and some of his colleagues to talk about prudence and cutting borrowing and debt when in fact their Government failed to save any of the oil revenues. It is clear that many businesses have borrowed too much in recent years.

I am saying that, at the last count, Norway had £300 billion in the reserves, or something along those lines, and other countries in the middle east have similar or larger amounts. The UK Government is one of the Governments that have failed and borrowed far too much. Individuals in our society have borrowed too much, too, which has often been because of irresponsible lenders. On Saturday, I received through the door an invitation to borrow at an interest rate of 82 per cent and an APR—annual percentage rate—of 272 per cent. Frankly, that is exploitation. Our football clubs have not been exempt from borrowing too much. In yesterday afternoon’s debate, I was disappointed to find out how many Partick Thistle supporters there are in the Parliament. I must accept that my team, Clyde, have had similar financial problems. Football clubs need to learn, too. As we do not have the savings that Norway and other countries have, we need reasonable amounts of borrowing. The question is how we do that borrowing. Is it through straight loans, the Scottish Futures Trust or PFI/PPP? Let us be honest that borrowing is borrowing. For years, we were told that PFI/PPP was not really borrowing and it was kept off the balance sheet. As an accountant, I must accept that accountants were partly to blame for that. They looked at the letter of the law and forgot about its spirit. I suggest that lawyers are guilty of that, too. Glasgow City Council presents a particularly bad example of PFI and how it did not work. Secondary schools were refurbished and rebuilt in that way, with the council paying well over the odds for what it got. The council is tied into buildings for 30 years, although it might or might not need them, as none of us knows what will happen in 30 years. The payments are ring fenced, which means that if the council has to make other cuts, those cuts have to be greater, because the council unwisely went into the PFI deals. The council has realised now that it made a mistake, and it has replaced primary schools in a different way. That change is belated but welcome. Obviously, there is a danger that anyone will borrow too much, which applies again to Glasgow. When I was first elected as a councillor in 1998, about half the rent from housing went to servicing the debt, and the housing itself was therefore in a poor state. That is something that none of us wants to see. The more recent addition of prudential borrowing for local authorities has been a major step forward and has largely worked. When I was a councillor, we were given a lot of advice by finance staff. I was going to read out the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy code, but I shall refrain from doing that as time is against us. However, as I understand it, we could have three dilapidated schools in an area, with costs being great because of repairs and heating. By closing the three schools and building a brand new one, we would make savings, which are then fed back into the system. In that situation, prudential borrowing is allowed, and it seems to have worked. I assume that that is what the Labour amendment is aimed at, although I am not sure that it adds much to the motion. When I trained as an accountant, prudence was a fundamental concept of accountancy. Sadly, the accounting profession has moved away from that in recent years. Prudence also got a bad name because it was linked to Gordon Brown. Finally, one question that has been raised by a few members, not least Rhoda Grant and Neil Findlay, is about what we would spend the money on if we had more money for capital projects. Obviously, any Government has to set priorities, and we cannot all get everything that we want. We have had a lot of good capital investment in the east end of Glasgow in recent years—the Clyde gateway, the Commonwealth games, the M74, the M8 and the M73—but if John Swinney wants my wish list for the years ahead, I am happy to oblige. I know that, for example, Labour’s priority in Glasgow is a rail link. In an ideal world, I would take that as well, but it is a luxury that will not help ordinary people in my constituency. We need decent primary schools, and we could do with more housing. There are some very interesting points in the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations briefing for the debate: “Investing in new-build affordable housing generates important social and economic benefits, provides employment, and a long-term saving to the taxpayer, via less spending on welfare. Every £100 million of investment supports 696 direct jobs and 557 indirect jobs. Every £1 spent on construction generates an extra £2.84 for the UK economy.” Thank you.

Will the member give way?

Does the member agree that significant investment made over the past four years—including, for example, the completion of the M74—has greatly benefited cities such as Glasgow, their outlying parts and the communities that sit outwith them?

Thank you, Presiding Officer. It is a great honour to speak for the first time in this Parliament. I will be happy to take an intervention or two, if any come along. The theme of the debate is “taking Scotland forward”. I guess that all members agree that we want to take Scotland forward, and that any disagreement is only about how we might do that. First, I would like to look back a little. I am privileged to have served on Glasgow City Council and at Westminster, and now to do so here at Holyrood. Some other time I will speak about how those institutions compare. My first lesson is that here the speaking-time clocks begin at zero, whereas at Westminster they count down to zero. A good tradition at Westminster is to refer in one’s maiden speech to the previous member for the constituency that one serves, so I would like to mention Frank McAveety, who covered the main part of my constituency, and Margaret Curran, who covered a substantial part of it. As members know, I have had a number of contests with them over recent years, which, on the whole, have been fairly civilised, and I thank them for that. All three of us have had victories and defeats. Both of them are well liked by many constituents in the east end of Glasgow, and I would like to put on record my thanks and those of the constituency to them for what they have done and to wish them well in their future careers. [Applause.] Looking forward, there is already a lot of good news in Glasgow Shettleston, which I am extremely enthusiastic about. Next month, the M74 extension is due to open, which will take great pressure off transport, and the M8 in particular. On Tuesday, I spent a large part of the day visiting the Clyde gateway, which is a tremendously impressive project, especially because it will bring contaminated and disused land in the east end of Glasgow back into use, which will help with jobs, housing and all sorts of things. A third major thing that is coming to our area is the Commonwealth games. Members would be welcome to come and visit the constituency to see the buildings that are going up. I thank MSPs of all parties who have supported bringing the Commonwealth games to the east end of Glasgow.

Other people are probably better able than I am to answer that question in detail, but I will give members an example. I visited one project at the east end of the Clyde gateway area. In a section where 40 people worked, eight of them were local people who had been taken on specifically because they were local. Many of the contractors have committed to and are enthusiastic about doing that. Right at the beginning of the process, when contracts are put out to tender, councils should insist that contractors bring in local people. Today, I want to speak about more than just physical engineering projects, which are, in one sense, easy to achieve if one has the people and the money. Perhaps one of the more challenging things for my part of the east end of Glasgow and the west of Scotland is sectarianism. When I was first elected as a councillor in 1998, Glasgow City Council had a list of problems that it faced—poverty was a challenge, and there were many other issues, including women’s issues and race and gender issues—but sectarianism was not on that list. Iain Gray was correct to point out that we could all have done more historically, not just over four or 12 years but over hundreds of years. We all look back on many aspects of our lives and think that we could have done more. The important thing is to see sectarianism as a challenge on which we are making progress. We have to thank people across the board in all parties who have helped to raise the issue of sectarianism. I believe that the first person to run with it in this Parliament was Donald Gorrie, and I realise that Jack McConnell, who has been mentioned, also treated sectarianism as a major concern. Is there an easy answer to the problem? I do not believe that there is. We have hundreds of years of tradition to deal with, and there are people who have strong loyalties to their group even though their personal faith might be very limited. In the 1500s and 1600s, most people in Europe would have said that they were either Protestant or Catholic. Minorities, such as those in the Baptist Church, like me, were persecuted by both the Catholics and the Protestants. In this 21st century, we live in a fairly secular age, where Christians—and probably all religious people—are in the minority. On one hand, in most of the denominations, there are people with a strong, personal, committed faith who are working together better than they have ever done in the past. Yet, at the same time, there are still strong divisions, often among the many people in society who never or seldom attend mass or church services. This is where we are, and there is no point in pretending that we are not. We need to move forward. Iain Gray is right that we need to think about the legislation and get it correct. We also need to try things and take risks to move ahead. Schools have a part to play. A good example of that is in Barlanark, where the different schools work together well. The Scotland that I want to see is one that embraces and encourages a wide range of interests, especially minority interests—religious people, disabled folk, younger and older people, gay and black. I want a Scotland in which we are free to disagree with each other, even strongly disagree with each other, but where we still respect the other person and count them as part of our community.