Concerns are being expressed by my constituents across Dumfries and Galloway, particularly about the fact that the proposal will be considered by the SPA board in such a short time—it will consider it this Thursday. Does the cabinet secretary consider that six days’ notice of a change that has significant consequences for Dumfries and Galloway is a sufficient level of engagement or in the spirit of partnership working?

I am delighted to speak in support of the Government’s amendment to the motion that is before the Parliament, not least because it gives me, like many speakers in the debate, the opportunity once more to place on record my admiration for, and gratitude to, all of our NHS staff for the way that they attend to Scotland’s public health needs in what we all acknowledge to be challenging circumstances. That is why I was disappointed, although perhaps not surprised, when I read the motion lodged by Mr Findlay, because it implies clearly that the NHS in Scotland is not presently fit to meet the needs of Scotland’s sick and infirm. Nor does it mention that the NHS is taking significant steps and implementing substantial reforms to meet the challenges ahead. We know that there are pressure points and challenges, but the Government is by no means complacent in its response to addressing them. The Labour motion would lead one to believe that the Government is taking no measures to prepare the NHS—and, indeed, the country as a whole—for the challenges that we know will face our public health sector in the future. If the Labour members of the Parliament are in any doubt about the range and ambition of those preparations, I urge them to consider seriously the amendment to Mr Findlay’s motion lodged by the cabinet secretary. If any reasonable person does so, they will conclude that, by any domestic or international metric, the SNP Government’s custodianship of our shared NHS in Scotland reflects a process of continuing reform that is ensuring that our nurses and doctors are equipped to provide the best possible care for the sick and infirm throughout Scotland. Indeed, it is difficult to avoid comparisons with the situation in Wales, where the Labour Party is in power but where progress on key targets lags behind the performance of the NHS under the SNP Government. On a more positive note, let us consider a few of the reforms that the Government is currently implementing to ensure that our NHS is fit for purpose as we confront the unprecedented societal and financial challenges—at least, under Westminster rule—that we will face in the future.

I would like to make some progress. My apologies to Mr Findlay, but I think that we have heard enough from him this afternoon. The integration of health and social care that the Government is implementing is a central plank in our response to the challenges of an ageing population in Scotland. It has the potential to change fundamentally the capacity of the country’s public health services to respond effectively and compassionately to the complex needs of the elderly and, crucially, to improve the quality of their lives. I firmly believe that it will do that. It will also release NHS resources to ensure that we are able to deliver the necessary quantity and quality of acute services to those in need. Under the SNP Government, significant reforms are being implemented that will improve workload, workforce and bed planning through a series of groundbreaking mandatory planning tools that will help our health boards to plan for the number of staff and beds that they require. There are also other reforms that are leading to increased efficiencies in the delivery of NHS services. Similarly, the numbers of NHS front-line staff continue to increase under the SNP Government. There are more nurses and nursing students in the NHS today than when we took office, which demonstrates the Government’s commitment to increasing the capability of the NHS in the coming years. The health of the nation—and, so, the pressures to which our NHS must respond—is also a function of the preventative actions that we are taking to avoid citizens placing essentially avoidable demands on the NHS in the future. I have already mentioned the integration of health and social care, but I also point to other preventative actions, particularly last week’s announcement that all children in primaries 1 to 3 will receive free school meals. That single measure will directly promote the health of our children in the all-important younger years, thereby reducing the likelihood of them succumbing to a range of medical conditions in later life and helping us to tackle the health inequalities that continue to blight our society. That begs the question why Labour chose to vote against that measure last week. I respectfully ask Labour colleagues to reflect on the key measures that the Government has taken and is taking to ensure that our valued and trusted NHS is equipped to tackle the challenges that are ahead. No Government or politician owns the NHS. The NHS is owned by and works for, relentlessly and with extraordinary success, the people of Scotland. I sincerely believe that this Government—the current custodian of the NHS—has a clear strategy for managing the health and broader welfare challenges that are ahead. It is implementing that strategy with a focus and purpose that are not evident elsewhere in the United Kingdom. I urge members to support the amendment that the cabinet secretary has lodged. That is not a matter of political point scoring; it is the mature and responsible approach that recognises the excellent actions that the Scottish Government is taking, and its longer-term vision for health and social care, to ensure that our NHS is equipped to meet successfully the considerable challenges that are ahead.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the agreed common agricultural policy budget 2014 to 2020 will have on South Scotland. (S4O-02772)

Given that Ireland—a country of a similar size to Scotland—will receive twice as much pillar 1 funding as Scotland and seven times as much pillar 2 funding per hectare, can the cabinet secretary tell me how our farmers and rural communities across Dumfries and Galloway will stand to benefit from future CAP negotiations in an independent Scotland, in which we will be able to speak up for ourselves in Europe and will not have to let a United Kingdom Government with different priorities speak for us and therefore negotiate a comparatively worse deal for Scotland?

The minister will be aware that many settlements on the Dumfries and Galloway coast were affected by this severe weather and that, at present, the region receives only a general warning of the likelihood of such an event. Given the length and varied topography of the region’s coastline, will the minister give consideration to how more specific and localised coastal flood warnings can be issued in future?

I, too, congratulate my colleague Fiona McLeod on securing this evening’s debate on an important area of health policy. Improving the eye health of people in Scotland, eliminating avoidable sight loss and improving the inclusion, participation and independence of blind and partially sighted people are ambitious aims that have wider benefits for the public health agenda. Community optometry plays an essential role in delivering the national health service’s 2020 vision by providing diagnosis, prompt referrals and—increasingly—treatment in the community. It is difficult to conceive of a clearer example of effective early intervention than being able to prevent a person’s losing their sight—not least given all the dramatic impacts on health and wellbeing, as well as on NHS and social care services, that sight loss can have. Community optometrists and Optometry Scotland are absolutely essential in delivering a service that has grown by 25 per cent since free NHS eye examinations were introduced in 2006. Without them we would not have made the progress that is already being made in improving Scotland’s eye health. That is not to say that there is not more to do. For example, studies suggest lower uptake of free eye examinations among low-income households remains. To an extent, that reflects wider concerns about the persistence of health inequalities, which remain a significant problem for Scotland and should concern us, as my colleague Rhoda Grant highlighted. We know, for example, that the incidence of type 2 diabetes has a direct relationship with deprivation; Audit Scotland’s 2012 report on health inequalities found that the incidence of type 2 diabetes increases significantly with deprivation. In 2008, the incidence of type 2 diabetes was around 2.5 per cent for the least-deprived areas, but was more than 4 per cent in the most-deprived areas. With diabetes comes the risk of diabetic retinopathy, which can have severe consequences for patients’ sight. Increasing the uptake of the universal eye examination, particularly among low-income households, is an important measure in helping to address at least the symptoms of health inequalities. The situation also emphasises, in my view, the importance of taking a universal approach to providing health services, which is a crucial underpinning to the ambition to be the “world leader in integrated eye care” that Fiona McLeod’s motion refers to. As elected members, we could all assist in making sure that our constituents know that they are entitled to a free sight check, the benefits of taking up that entitlement and the kind of fantastic eye care services that are being delivered in our high street opticians. Also, the flexible easy access to services that community optometrists provide, coupled with the direct electronic referral system to improve the patient route from primary to secondary care, will deliver lasting improvements and benefits by detecting conditions early when people are examined, and by making prompt and appropriate referrals. As Fiona McLeod mentioned, local optometrists who have completed the necessary Optometry Scotland training are now able to issue prescriptions to treat eye conditions. The streamlining and improving of eye care services are clearly set to continue. In my view those are very welcome developments, especially in some of the more rural and remote parts of the region that I represent—South Scotland—in Dumfries and Galloway and the Borders. We have high ambitions to eliminate avoidable sight loss—which is a bold statement, but one that is absolutely right. Community optometrists have an absolutely vital role to play in delivering that objective so I am very pleased that tonight’s debate has offered an opportunity to highlight their vital contribution and the ongoing innovative work to integrate eye care nationally with other NHS services and optometry professionals across Scotland, which I hope will have a positive impact on levels of sight loss and, ultimately, will improve the eye health of all the people in Scotland as locally as possible.

I, too, wish the Presiding Officer and all my colleagues a very happy new year. I thank the minister for his efforts across the country over the festive period and for visiting the Whitesands area in Dumfries, in particular. Dumfries and Galloway Council’s strategic flood risk assessment ranked Newton Stewart and Minnigaff highly in respect of flood risk on all factors. Will the minister consider those areas and any other high-risk areas in the region being designated as SEPA target areas for specific early flood warnings?

I welcome the opportunity to speak and I welcome the launch of the consultation on the draft strategy. I thank the young people’s sport panel for its work and I am pleased that some of its members have joined us for the debate. The strategy is for young people and has been guided by them; I congratulate them on that. I also warmly welcome the announcement that £5.8 million in funding will continue to support schools in delivering PE lessons. Some members have reflected on the importance of sport in promoting health and wellbeing. We need sport for young people to function well at all levels so that we identify and support the champion athletes of the future and allow everyone to participate, whatever their ability level is. As I am a South Scotland MSP, I will mention that the under-20 ice hockey world championships are taking place at Dumfries ice bowl this week. This morning, the Stanley cup—the most prestigious trophy in ice hockey—arrived in Glasgow ahead of celebrations in Dumfries later this week to mark 100 years of ice hockey in Britain. That is great for Dumfries because, like the Commonwealth games, it brings elite-level sport closer to home and such opportunities are very important for our young people. Indeed, a key message in the strategy is the importance of opportunities, whether it is the chance to see world-class sporting events at first hand or the chance to get involved in active participation. Much of what is happening in Dumfries and Galloway to deliver opportunities is already aligned with the key areas that are outlined in the strategy. For example, the local council is moving ahead with plans to establish community sports hubs and has secured funding from sportscotland to create a new post that will concentrate on developing competitive school sport across the region. I understand that it is the first such post in Scotland. Secondary schools throughout Dumfries and Galloway are part of the 2014 ambassador programme, and a lead 2014 conference is being planned for next February or March. The support and training that will be offered at that event will be linked to the Queen’s baton relay as an opportunity to spread engagement in sport as widely as possible throughout the region. Reflecting the importance of the great people strand of the strategy, Dumfries dolphins swimming club is one of the first swimming clubs in Scotland to have worked through all the elements of the positive coaching Scotland programme, and the council is working with sportscotland on piloting the multiskill coach training to which the minister referred. The Dumfries and Galloway branch of Scottish Disability Sport recently recorded a fantastic success at the national junior championships for swimmers with a sensory impairment or physical disability, with the region’s swimmers well represented in the medals table. It is vital that we are inclusive and use the strategy to offer opportunities to all our young people. On the great places strand, there is a great opportunity in the Dalbeattie schools project—a new learning campus that will be built through the Scottish Futures Trust—for us to test the early involvement of sportscotland in the design process and create a really first-rate facility. There is so much that is positive both in the strategy and in what is already happening on the ground that it is impossible to do the subject justice in the time that we have. I will, therefore, close by reflecting on the minister’s summary of what the young people’s sport panel said that it wants: “great opportunities, supported by great people, delivered in great places and given a higher profile.” The work that is already taking place is starting to deliver those things, and I am confident that the draft strategy will deliver on those ambitions and the aspirations of Scotland’s children and young people. I look forward to the publication of the final strategy and the action plan next spring.

Will the cabinet secretary highlight the benefits of an integrated benefits and tax system in assisting families with childcare, as outlined in “Scotland’s Future”?

I thank Elaine Murray for securing this debate on a valuable and vital voluntary service, and I welcome the opportunity to speak about a good idea from Dumfries and Galloway that is spreading across Scotland. On one of my early visits as a newly elected MSP I spent a day volunteering with the Food Train’s Stewartry branch in Dumfries and Galloway at the invitation of two good friends who are volunteers with Food Train. My day was organised by Jif Hyde, who co-ordinates Food Train’s activities in the west of Dumfries and Galloway. I have to say that, like Alex Fergusson, I had an enlightening experience. At 20 per cent, the proportion of retired people in the Stewartry is one of the highest for any locality in Scotland. The Stewartry also has the largest population of older people in the region, with 10 per cent over the age of 75, in comparison with a regional average of 8.5 per cent and a Scottish average of 7.1 per cent. The number of lone pensioners in the Stewartry, which is the most sparsely populated area of Dumfries and Galloway, is 25 per cent higher than the national average. Given that people are living longer, which is a good thing, but not necessarily living well, there is a substantial demand for Food Train services in the Stewartry. In fact, the Stewartry service has slightly more customers than neighbouring Wigtownshire, with its significantly larger population. Food Train’s 63 volunteers in the Stewartry are kept hard at work. From those who deal with orders being sent or phoned in on a Monday to the teams of shoppers who descend on the local Co-op to buy the items and the drivers who make the deliveries every week, as well as the organisers who ensure that everything runs smoothly, a huge amount of time, effort and care is put into the service. Food Train has attracted loyalty—my friends have been volunteering with Food Train for seven years—as well as good will from other local businesses. For example, a local garage in Kirkcudbright has in the past made available the use of a four-by-four so that deliveries can continue during bad winter weather. It would be fair to say that Food Train has become part of the social landscape. I want to reflect on why Food Train is important in a wider context. Its services are vital because they will help deliver the national health service’s 2020 vision of more people living for longer in their own homes. Making sure that people have enough good-quality food to eat is absolutely fundamental to achieving that aim. The service also has less-measurable benefits, such as the provision of social interaction: the fact that someone is checking—unobtrusively, of course—that folk are all right and taking action if something is wrong. Many of Food Train’s more rural members in the Stewartry live in communities that used to have a shop, a post office and even a bank, most of which no longer exist. Those opportunities for social interaction are gone and with them the opportunities for folk to look out for one another, so the news that the Big Lottery is to fund the roll-out of the Food Train friends befriending project across Dumfries and Galloway is particularly welcome and, I am sure, will be of great benefit. Food Train is an extremely valuable service, which I have been delighted to experience first hand. It is hugely beneficial to the members who receive its services and the volunteers who provide them. It is an excellent initiative and a fantastic organisation. I join Elaine Murray and my colleagues across the chamber in wishing Food Train the very best for the future and thanking all the volunteers who deliver such a vital and valuable service.

Does the Deputy First Minister agree that at a time when the UK Government is seriously contemplating withdrawal from the EU, Scotland’s future in the EU can be guaranteed only by independence and that under any scenario, an independent Scottish Government taking its place at the EU top table is the only way to ensure that Scotland’s best interests are represented in EU legislative and policy decisions?

I am delighted to be speaking in a debate on the general principles of a bill that will introduce a substantial and wide-ranging reform of the way in which we deliver adult health and social care. The cabinet secretary reminded us in his opening speech why the bill is so necessary. As a nation, we have larger numbers of people who are living longer than ever before. That is good news, but it means that we need to re-examine how we deliver and manage care in Scotland for our older people. The integration of health and social care services is needed to improve outcomes for individuals, particularly adults with multiple long-term conditions and complex support needs, and to improve the experiences of both those who use such services and those who provide them. As we know, key to delivering that vision is the principle of person-centred healthcare, whereby services are integrated around the needs of the individual. I want to highlight the representations that the committee received on the need to ensure that the housing sector’s contribution to improved health and social care outcomes is recognised in the bill, and that the new integration authorities involve their strategic housing partners in joint commissioning to achieve person-centred quality care at home. Ultimately, our aim should be that everyone, no matter the complexity of their requirements, has an equal chance of a good life. We know that homes that are responsive to a patient’s needs—particularly if the patient has dementia, a learning difficulty or autism—are needed to achieve that aim, as they make a significant difference to how care and support is delivered and the outcomes that it has. Another key issue that was raised with the committee was the need for the full involvement of the third sector at both the strategic partnership and local levels, as well as issues surrounding the involvement of a range of other key stakeholders, including our allied health professionals, service users, carers and disabled people and their representative organisations, all of whom have a wealth of collective experience, expertise and professionalism. They are huge assets in helping to achieve a person-centred and needs-led approach to the delivery of locally based quality health and social care services. Another key voice is that of our GPs. The evidence that the British Medical Association and the Royal College of General Practitioners submitted to the committee was helpful, as it allowed us to examine possible barriers to fully and successfully engaging GPs in the planning of local services. An excellent example of integration that is already working—and being driven by GPs—is Kirkcudbright community hospital and its adjoining GP practice, which has developed strong working relationships with local social services staff. That is only one example. At the other end of the spectrum, the GPs at the deep end group’s case in favour of having GP surgeries in our most deprived areas functioning as natural hubs for integrated care to tackle deep-seated health inequalities requires us to recognise that, in many of those communities, services may be the least integrated. That great variation in local experience reinforces the case for the bill and highlights how important integration at the locality level will be, how important the widest involvement of key stakeholders—including GPs and our local professionals—and partners at that level will be, and how important it is to scale up the capacity of the third sector to ensure that those who work closest to individuals and communities can participate and engage fully in service design and service delivery. Fully involving our GPs, the third sector, local professionals, carers groups and disabled people at the locality level will make a positive difference to the delivery of integration. The localities will be where many of the key decisions concerning service users will be made. In Dumfries and Galloway, the local authority and the NHS board are already clear that the way to implement integration is to focus on building up the service model at locality level first. Our region has a natural advantage, in that it has four well-established areas corresponding to the old district councils—a natural pre-existing delivery model. The NHS and the council have capitalised on that by commencing integration from the point closest to the service user through planning local integration in those four areas, rather than starting at the furthest way point with the top-level governance model. Of course, both those structures need to be right, but in considering the top-level arrangements we must not lose sight of the fundamental importance of integration in the localities, where the services will actually be delivered and the real difference made. I will close by saying that I fully support the general principles of the bill. I look forward to considering the amendments during stage 2, when I hope that we can work together to produce an act that will be regarded as a fundamental reform of the way in which we care for Scotland’s people.

I, too, congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing the debate. I also congratulate the Medical Research Council on funding 100 years of life-changing discoveries. Everyone is aware of the important work that is being undertaken across the spectrum of medical research in Scotland’s universities and specialist research centres. It ranges from world-class cutting-edge scientific research, such as that conducted by the centre for regenerative medicine at the University of Edinburgh, to research that examines broader issues, such as the study of social and environmental influences on health that is taking place in the social and public health sciences unit, which is based in the University of Glasgow. Those are but two examples of a range of outstanding medical research. Much of the work is funded by the public sector, and a significant proportion of that funding comes from the MRC. That funding, along with direct funding from the Scottish Government and from charitable organisations—not least, the Wellcome Trust—is attracted to Scotland because of the world-class researchers who have chosen to live and work here and to utilise the world-class facilities that we have in, and can attract to, our universities and research centres. As Murdo Fraser’s motion notes, the funding figures in the area of medical research are impressive. As in many other areas of intellectual and applied research, in the domain of medical research Scotland’s universities certainly punch above their weight. As Murdo Fraser said, on the day on which the Scottish Government’s comprehensive prospectus for Scotland under independence has been published, it would be remiss of us not to respond to those who question the future of world-class medical research in our universities and research centres in an independent Scotland. Opponents of independence ask us to believe that the world-class research and our world-class researchers will simply cease to attract research awards from the current UK-wide research councils, including the MRC, the day after independence. We are asked to believe that those research councils, whose commitment is to fund the medical research that is most likely to deliver critical results and save lives, will for some reason decide to turn their backs on some of the world’s best researchers and research institutions regardless of the costs that that would impose on those whose lives could be transformed by the work. Moreover, by doing so, the councils would be opting to write off many years of investment in contributing to the excellence that those research centres now demonstrate. That is simply not a credible argument and just does not stack up.

Sorry, but I would like to continue. Research in all areas, and most certainly medical research, is about excellence and collaboration. The best world-class research projects cross boundaries, whether those boundaries are disciplinary, linguistic, institutional or national. With independence, the Scottish Government will seek to maintain a common research area with the rest of the UK, including shared research councils, access to facilities and peer review to the benefit of Scotland and the rest of the UK. Crucially, that will benefit those whose futures depend on the research that is undertaken in our universities as well as those further afield in the UK, in our EU partner countries and across continents, as research increasingly becomes truly internationalised. My view is that the most significant threat to the excellence of our university research, in medicine as in many other areas, is not independence but the increasingly restrictive immigration policy of the Tory-led Westminster Government, which is already seriously undermining the ability of our universities and leading research institutes to attract world-class talent to Scotland to pursue research. That—not independence—is the real threat to Scotland’s research capacity. Once again, I congratulate Murdo Fraser on bringing forward the issue for debate. I also congratulate the MRC on the vital role that it has played in the past 100 years, and I look forward to the next 100 years of its work.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it is making on improving children’s dental health. (S4O-02617)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his comprehensive response and welcome the improvements and the progress that is being made. The success of the Government’s child oral health programme goes hand in hand with access to dental services. In Dumfries and Galloway there was a period before 2007 when accessing routine NHS dental treatment was almost impossible. What steps has the Government taken to increase access to NHS dentists?

Does the minister agree with the steering group for general practitioners at the deep end, which is made up of 360 GPs who work in the 100 most deprived practices in Scotland, and which found that Westminster austerity and welfare reform are damaging communities and targeting the most vulnerable people in our society? Does he agree that the only way that we can tackle health inequalities in Scotland is by giving this Parliament the full powers of independence?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to support the creative arts in Dumfries and Galloway. (S4O-02581)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of long-standing ambitions in Kirkcudbright to create an art gallery of national significance. Dumfries and Galloway Council agreed recently to support the community’s plans and commit money into the project. Will the cabinet secretary undertake to meet members of Kirkcudbright Community Trust and me with a view to establishing how the Government might be able to support the community’s ambitions?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate on a fundamental principle in the delivery of safe, effective and world-class care for the people of Scotland, which is that health and social care services should be firmly integrated around the needs of individuals, their carers and families, and that we place people at the centre and ensure that they have the support to direct their own care. I thank the Health and Social Care Alliance Scotland, the RCN, Marie Curie Cancer Care, Macmillan Cancer Support and Inclusion Scotland for the helpful briefings that they provided in advance of the debate. As the cabinet secretary outlined, the principle of person-centred care is one of the three quality ambitions in the 2010 healthcare quality strategy, which reflects the priorities of the 2020 vision of Scotland as a country in which people live longer and healthier lives at home or in a homely setting. Last week, I attended an event in Parliament with allied health professionals, at which I met a young disabled woman called Emma who lives independently but relies on care. She called good-quality, person-centred care her “passport to life”. That says in a nutshell what we are trying to achieve and why. A key consideration in making NHS services truly person centred is how we provide them in ways that suit the needs of individual patients—what matters to them. As the cabinet secretary has said previously, that does not mean routine operations taking place at midnight, but it certainly should mean that a patient who is ready to be discharged from hospital on a Saturday morning does not wait until Monday because the right mix of integrated services is not available over the weekend. That is why, like my colleague Bob Doris, I welcome the £4 million that the Scottish Government is investing across five health boards—NHS Borders, NHS Lanarkshire, NHS Forth Valley, NHS Tayside and NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde—for trialling innovative approaches in acute care to ensure that Scotland’s NHS is a genuinely seven-day service. That, in turn, will require a transformative shift in approach within primary and community health care to ensure that our GPs have the necessary time, capacity and support to deliver person-centred, safe and effective care locally, and to enable greater access to GPs and other practice services. Partnership working with patients, their families and carers, the third sector, allied health professionals, community nurses, pharmacists and social care providers will be key. That is central to the health and social care integration agenda. A number of innovative projects that focus on new models of care delivery and new forms of partnership with GPs are worth highlighting. For example, the Health and Social Care Alliance, in partnership with the Royal College of General Practitioners, undertook an 18-month pilot project called improving links in primary care. It was funded by the Scottish Government and used four pilot sites to explore how the providers of support in the statutory and third sectors can be integrated for mutual benefit, and to explore what the benefits are of strengthening connections between general practice and local communities, for example through signposting people to local services. It also tested the feasibility of embedding in general practices the access to local information to support self-management—ALISS—system. That, in essence, is a bottom-up approach that connects existing online resources and makes it possible for people and local organisations who know best to access and share local information. That shows what can be done. Another example is how the deep-end general practices tackle the serious challenges that face many GPs who work in areas of multiple deprivation and health inequalities, and deal with the increasing number of patients who require more complex long-term health care. Of course, all those problems have been exacerbated by the welfare reform changes. Through the assistance of Professor Graham Watt, I recently met a number of members of the deep-end group of GPs, who work in some of the most deprived communities in Scotland. They want to tackle head on what they call the “dark synergy” of factors that generate health inequalities. They argue that the population-based distribution of GPs does not match the demands and needs of the most deprived communities and the challenges of lower life expectancy, higher incidences of serious long-term conditions and comorbidities. Their vision affords GPs at the deep end the time and resources to start to tackle the effects of deep-seated societal issues on patient health, and to turn GP surgeries into integrated healthcare hubs for provision of a variety of interdisciplinary care and support services, with social workers attached to general practice and the link-worker role connecting practices and patients to community resources for health. It is with those examples in mind that I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement today of an initial £1 million development fund as part of a modernisation programme to support innovation and best practice in primary care, and that a first step in that modernisation will be the commissioning of strategic assessments of primary care from each health board, as part and parcel of their planning process. I wish briefly to highlight one final aspect of integrated, person-centred health and social care, which is in relation to ensuring that patients have access to appropriate end-of-life care. In Dumfries and Galloway—part of the region that I represent—there is an out-of-hours multipatient service, which is a partnership between Marie Curie Cancer Care, NHS Dumfries and Galloway and the Alexandra unit, which specialises in in-patient palliative care. The service is designed to provide care and support for people who have life-limiting illnesses and who are very ill, outside normal working hours in their homes, thereby avoiding the risk of their immediate admission to—and perhaps their dying in—hospital. In 2011-12, when a place of death was recorded, 54 per cent were at home against only 5 per cent in hospital. What has been announced today by the health secretary is an ambitious approach to person-centred, safe and effective care. Through the support of everyone working together with our primary, acute and social care teams, who do a fantastic and tireless job, I believe that it is the right way forward in enabling our constituents to have a health and social care system that is fit for 2020. I support the motion in the cabinet secretary’s name.

I am delighted to lead the debate on a first for Scotland that is happening in the far west of Dumfries and Galloway. I am also delighted to welcome members of the Scottish Woodlot Association to the public gallery; I thank them and Scottish Land & Estates for the helpful briefings that were sent to members ahead of the debate. I think that members will readily associate Dumfries and Galloway with forestry. In fact, the region produces approximately 30 per cent of Scotland’s annual timber harvest and has a significant timber processing industry. Having visited the sawmills at Lockerbie and Dalbeattie—the latter being the largest single-site sawmill in Europe—I must say how impressed I was by the huge scale of the operations. The region also has smaller sawmills and forestry contractors, and the industry plays an important role in tourism as the Forestry Commission hosts two of the popular 7stanes mountain bike trails at Kirroughtree and Dalbeattie. Dumfries and Galloway Council estimates that the sector employs approximately 3,000 people in the region, with numerous further economic benefits associated with public access, sporting activities and nature tourism. Of course, forestry in Dumfries and Galloway also faces challenges. Larch tree disease is a particularly significant challenge, so I welcome the Government’s commitment of resources to tackle the infestation in Galloway and I thank the Minister for Environment and Climate Change for his visit with me in August so that we could see for ourselves the full extent of the disease in the Galloway forest. In the short term, larch disease will keep much of the industry very busy, but it will also present future challenges. Even with those challenges, forestry is a big business, which is part of the issue that the Scottish Woodlot Association has identified. It is very difficult for someone who works in forestry to manage woodland for themselves. Scotland has the most concentrated forest ownership in Europe. By way of example, Ireland has around a fifth of the forest area of Scotland but more than five times as many forest owners. The Netherlands also has a forest area of around a fifth of Scotland’s but with seven times as many owners. That is an issue because the concentration of ownership and large average plot sizes go hand in hand. In Scotland, our average private forest ownership area is 232 hectares. In the Scandinavian countries, small-scale forestry thrives: in Norway, the average forest smallholding is 50 hectares; in Sweden, it is 43 hectares; and in Finland it is just 32 hectares. Scotland, on the other hand, also has about 300,000 hectares of undermanaged woodlands. Clearly, the problem is that there are few opportunities for people to manage forests for themselves, while there is a substantial amount of woodland that is not productive. That is where woodlot licences come in. A woodlot licence allows a landowner to agree a long-term rolling lease with the Scottish Woodlot Association, which then divides the woodland into one or more woodlot licences and sets a rent for each based on its annual allowable cut. The licence holders manage the woodland and can fell, process and sell the timber for themselves. The idea is that the licence holder should be able to make money out of the proposition—not enough to give up the day job, perhaps, but certainly enough to be a significant addition to their income. The benefit to the landowner is that an area of forestry, which might otherwise become a problem that the landowner might not have the skills to manage or might be prohibitively expensive to deal with, is taken off the landowner’s hands. What was a potential liability becomes a source of lease income. The concept of woodlots is not new, as they date back to 1948 in British Columbia. However, the concept did not really take off until the 1970s. In 1976, there were only 37 woodlot licences in British Columbia, but there are now 836 licences, which manage 0.5 million hectares of forestry and provide all or part of an income for 12,000 people. Therefore, it would be fair to say that the model has a proven track record. Woodlot licences will not only offer an opportunity to engage many more people in the active management of Scotland’s forests but allow undermanaged woodland to be brought back into production. They can also help to tackle the very real threat to Scotland’s forestry industry that is posed by the shrinking workforce, which is generally composed of older people and has few young people coming into the sector. The sort of direct hands-on experience that woodlot licences offer could play a crucial role in attracting a new generation into the forest industry, at a time when we need them most. One benefit of a woodlot movement would be the possibility to pool experience and even equipment, so that not every new woodlot licence holder need be an experienced forester with expensive gear. The Scottish Woodlot Association briefing calls that “open-source forestry”. That is an attractive idea, which is certainly more likely to attract people with an interest in forestry into developing that interest further. Of course, there would be no woodlot licences in Scotland if it were not for Angus Carrick-Buchanan, owner of the Corsewall estate near Stranraer, who has taken a leap of faith in setting up the very first woodlot licence. That licence covers 37 hectares of mixed woodland on the Corsewall estate, initially for an 18-month period to establish the concept, although all parties are committed to a longer-term agreement. The licence holder, Mark Rowe, will be responsible for managing the woodland according to a management plan that has been drawn up by the landowner. That includes felling and extracting timber, which the licence holder will be able to process and sell for himself as firewood and sawn timber. I hope that, together, Angus Carrick-Buchanan, Mark Rowe and the Scottish Woodlot Association will be able to demonstrate that woodlot licences are ready to go, so that all the potential benefits that I have outlined can start to be realised sooner rather than later. I also warmly welcome the support that Scottish Land & Estates has expressed for the concept of woodlot licences. I hope that its willingness to promote and encourage the uptake of woodlot licences among landowners will help to roll out the concept across Scotland. That said, the Scottish Woodlot Association is a small organisation with a big idea—an idea that is receiving lots of interest and lots of requests. If the concept is to be rolled out across Scotland, as I hope it will, the association will need help to make that happen. Therefore, I invite the minister to have a meeting with the Scottish Woodlot Association, so that we can explore further what contribution the use of woodlot licences on a wider scale could make towards achieving the Scottish Government’s policy objectives for forestry and what they could do not only to connect people to their local woodlands but to help stimulate rural enterprise, create more local jobs and support the forestry environment. I commend the hard work and dedication of the Scottish Woodlot Association, and Will Allen and Andy Brown in particular. Galloway now has the first Scottish woodlot licence and I hope that it will be home to many more. The idea could have substantial benefits for the forestry industry across Scotland. Woodlot licences could become as common a practice in rural Scotland as they are in British Columbia, and the whole of rural Scotland could benefit from their existence.

As a member of the Health and Sport Committee, I am delighted to speak in this important debate. I acknowledge the cross-party consensus that underpins the committee’s report. There is common ground across all political parties in the belief that access to new medicines is one of the most pressing and sensitive issues confronting the NHS. I therefore hope that the Government will be able to implement the report’s recommendations in the same spirit of consensus to create a better and more transparent set of criteria for accessing new medicines that will lead to improved outcomes for Scottish patients, particularly those suffering from rare and very rare medical conditions. I record my thanks to the many expert witnesses, clinicians, industry representatives, patient groups and charities who gave evidence. In particular, I thank Breakthrough Breast Cancer, Myeloma UK, Marie Curie Cancer Care and Beating Bowel Cancer. I also thank the private individuals who offered the committee both expert scientific evidence and evidence drawn from their experiences. I am pleased that so many of them are in the public gallery to listen to the debate. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s remarks in setting out the Government’s response to the committee’s report, which tackle head on many of the key issues and recommendations in the report. I hope that my committee colleagues will also welcome his remarks as a significant response to our work. In the time available, it is not possible for me to cover every aspect of the committee’s report, so I will focus my remarks on a few key areas. The commitment to increased transparency in Scotland’s medicines assessment system, which the cabinet secretary mentioned, is particularly welcome, as is the additional £1 million investment to support the SMC to hold its meetings in public from May next year. Greater transparency in the process should help to increase patient confidence that the systems that are used to decide access to medicines are both scientifically sound and fair. In our report, the committee made various recommendations that seek a greater involvement by patients and patient representatives in the SMC’s work, so I very much welcome the improvements that are to be made in supporting patients to engage in the process. Welcome as these changes are, they will only take us so far. A bigger challenge recognised by the committee was to reform the SMC’s decision-making process to ensure a better assessment of medicines’ cost-effectiveness and wider societal impact, in particular for end-of-life care and for treating very rare conditions. The committee called on the Scottish Government and the SMC to review that issue as a matter of priority, and I am delighted therefore that the cabinet secretary has taken on board that recommendation and that the SMC is expected to conclude its review on establishing a more flexible approach to the evaluation of new medicines and ensure that there is a wider assessment of value before Christmas. Similarly, I am sure that all members of the committee will welcome the proposal to replace the IPTR system with a new peer-approved clinical system that will oversee individual or group requests for medicines not recommended by the SMC, led by local consultants and local consultants and linked to clinical opinion. I am particularly pleased that the Government has listened to the committee’s concerns on the IPTR exceptionality criteria and our calls for the approval of particular drugs where there is clear clinical evidence that a patient would derive material benefit from them. It is also welcome that the NHS will be able to refer for consideration by the SMC new medicines that have not been submitted by a drugs company, when they are considered clinically important to NHS Scotland. The committee also considered the issue of clinical research trials and encouraging greater participation by patients in Scotland where appropriate. In that respect, I very much welcome the cabinet secretary’s response: for the Government’s chief scientist office to look at the creation of a Scottish clinical trial register, which will, I hope, help to raise awareness among patients and clinicians of on-going trials. The Health and Sport Committee’s report is a thorough and far-sighted document. It addresses one of the most complex and sensitive matters that anyone involved in public policy is likely to encounter. However, the very nature of the issue makes it equally important that the Government exercises care and performs the very highest level of due diligence at each stage in the process of constructing the new system—nowhere more so than in the development of a revised value-based assessment, in which there is a clear opportunity to develop a Scottish model of value. That will take time, but, as the cabinet secretary indicated, that does not mean that the Government cannot act in the meantime, as it has done through the changes outlined in its response. I am delighted that the rare conditions medicine fund will be extended to 2016, which provides an interim measure that should alleviate dependence on IPTRs. I firmly believe that the committee’s recommendations, which commanded cross-party consensus, together with the Scottish Government’s response plot a course towards a better and more transparent system for access to new medicines that is based on equity and clinical need.

Last year’s York Aviation report “The Impact of Air Passenger Duty in Scotland” pointed out that, in percentage terms, Prestwick airport is the one that is most affected by APD. Does the cabinet secretary believe that APD has contributed to the current situation, given that the entire aviation industry, including the airlines and the airport operators, are all desperate to see action on air passenger duty?

I am delighted to lead this debate in support of the Teenage Cancer Trust education programme. I thank the members who signed the motion and made the debate possible, and I thank those who will speak in such an important debate. I pay tribute to Dawn Crosby, Caroline Brocklehurst, Iona MacMillan and Rosanna Innes, from the Teenage Cancer Trust, who are in the public gallery. Their dedication and commitment to helping to improve the lives of teenagers and young people in Scotland who have cancer deserve our recognition and thanks. Their enthusiasm for what they do makes such a difference to the lives of the young people whom they support. I first heard about the Teenage Cancer Trust in 2000, when Roger Daltrey, of The Who, organised the first fundraising concert for the trust at the Royal Albert hall. I thought then that at last there was an organisation that was dedicated to supporting young people with cancer and helping them to deal with what is an extremely traumatic and life-changing event. Since its inception in 1990, when its first teenage cancer unit opened at the Middlesex hospital in London, the trust has gone on to fund, develop and open 25 units across the United Kingdom. It currently has four operational units in Scotland, which provide 18 beds across four hospitals in Edinburgh and Glasgow. It also funds youth support co-ordinators, who make a huge difference to young cancer patients’ quality of life, by helping them to share their experiences. In April I visited the Teenage Cancer Trust unit at the Beatson west of Scotland cancer centre, at Gartnavel hospital. It was an opportunity for me to learn about the services that are available to young people with cancer and to meet families and hear about their experiences at first hand, as well as meeting the dedicated nursing and clinical staff whose care and support is, without doubt, second to none. The visit was all the more poignant for me because I am a teenage cancer survivor, and I know what it is like to be that young person, who just wants to be like any normal teenager. I know how lonely I felt when I was not able to talk to anyone who was the same age as I was and who was going through the same treatment. I was so impressed by the unit, and I am so glad that young people who are fighting cancer have such a place to support them. What is so important about the unit is that it brings our young people together, where they can be treated by specialists in teenage cancer, and that it enables the young people to be themselves first and cancer patients second. For young people, the trauma of diagnosis and harsh chemotherapy—with all that that means for hair loss and fertility—happens at the worst possible time, just when they are trying to find out who they are. To be able to go through their treatment with young people their own age and not on their own, and to be able—when they feel up to it—to hang out together, playing pool, listening to music, watching DVDs and playing computer games, can make such a difference to the whole experience. It was at the unit that I met Amy Callaghan, who is in the gallery, and Amy Quinn, who unfortunately cannot be here. We have all read Amy Quinn’s letter about her personal journey with cancer. I thank Amy Callaghan, Mairead MacLeod, Emma Scullion, Angela Colquhoun and Luke Coulter for meeting me that afternoon, and I thank Amy Quinn in particular for sharing her experiences with us, which I know took a lot of courage. I think that all members will agree that Amy Quinn’s story has made more impact than any report or policy statement could do. It was very much with her wishes in mind that I sought this debate, because we should do everything possible to ensure that other young people do not have to go through the lengthy journey of diagnosis that she experienced. Teenagers and young adults with cancer are a particularly vulnerable group, with unique physical and emotional needs. As the trust said in its helpful briefing, cancer is the most common cause of non-accidental death in young people, and five-year survival rates remain lower in teenagers than in children. Seven young people aged 13 to 24 are diagnosed with cancer every day in the United Kingdom, which is around 2,500 each year. In Scotland, an average of 203 teenagers and young adults are diagnosed with cancer each year while, across all age groups, two in five people in Scotland will be diagnosed with some form of cancer during their lifetime. According to the trust, the signs of cancer in young people are often dismissed or misdiagnosed because they are similar to less harmful problems. Research that was carried out by the trust shows that 40 per cent of Scottish young people with cancer had to visit their general practitioner four times or more before their symptoms were taken seriously or they were referred to a specialist. Some of the difficulties can arise because young people do not always know when something is seriously wrong, take a while before they decide to seek medical advice or simply find it hard to talk to their GP and explain what is wrong. All that contrasts worryingly with the universally acknowledged fact that swift early diagnosis and referral for specialist treatment is vital and has a positive effect on patient experience, potentially reducing the intensity and duration of the treatment; the scale of late effects; quality of life; and, in some cancers, survival itself. Therefore, we need to educate young people and health professionals about the ways in which cancer can present in teenagers in order to improve the speed and quality of diagnosis. Although cancer in that age group is rare, given the comparatively poor survival rates it is vital that we all know the five common signs so that further medical advice can be sought if there are ever concerns. Those signs include pain of all kinds, including headaches, stomach ache and pains in the legs or arms; unexplained lumps, bumps or swellings; extreme tiredness; significant weight loss; and changes in a mole. To empower our young people to take control of their health, the trust plans to raise awareness of those five most common signs of cancer in our young people through its teenage cancer action week between 14 and 20 October. That will be actively promoted through schools, with a free education pack, as well as through social media, local GP surgeries and youth clubs. Members of the Scottish Parliament can help by sharing the information at our local community centres and surgeries. Another route is through the trust’s pioneering education programme, which is raising awareness and providing advice about the signs of teenage cancer, cancer treatments and prevention, and healthy living. To date, the trust has worked with 95 schools in Scotland, reaching more than 11,000 students, and we know that its innovative approach works because research by the University of Stirling on the programme showed an increase in the number of cancer warning signs that teenagers recognised. To help to ensure that education about and awareness of cancer continue to play a central role in early detection and diagnosis, the trust has been working in partnership with the Scottish Government’s detect cancer early programme. Since its launch in June by the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Alex Neil, the programme has succeeded in recruiting 20 schools, double the number of secondary schools in Glasgow that were initially targeted. All the schools will be monitored to evaluate the impact of the educational programme on both pupils and their wider families. In total, more than 2,400 students and 295 parents/carers will be part of the programme, making the study the biggest health intervention scheme of its kind in Scotland. It will, I hope, mean that the next generation is not afraid to talk about cancer. In that regard, our young people have a key role to play in Scotland’s fight against cancer. The Teenage Cancer Trust is working hard to improve the quality of life and chances of survival of teenagers and young people throughout Scotland, not least through its excellent education and awareness-raising programme. On 6 November, I will host a parliamentary reception with the trust at which it will launch a new report highlighting the scale of delayed diagnosis among young people with cancer in Scotland. Much work is being done, but more work still needs to be done to support our young people in their fight against cancer, ensuring that they have a clear care pathway that takes them forward to a life without cancer. I look forward to continuing to support the Teenage Cancer Trust in all that it does for Scotland’s young people with cancer.

I am delighted to speak in support of the Government’s motion on preparations for what is one of the largest and most prestigious golfing events in the world, which, together with the Commonwealth games and the second year of the homecoming, will put Scotland well and truly on the international stage in 2014 as we welcome the world to Scotland. From the warmth of our welcome to the quality of the facilities we have to offer, we could not have better opportunities than the Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games to demonstrate that, as the minister said in her opening remarks, Scotland is the perfect stage for major events. Many of those members who are geographically closer than I am to the Ryder cup location have already commented on specific aspects of the preparations for the event, so I will focus my remarks on some of the legacy benefits that we can secure as a result of the Ryder cup, such as wider participation, tourism opportunities, and physical activity and its implications for health and wellbeing. There is no question but that Scotland has a huge amount to offer as far as golf is concerned—from the local public courses to the most prestigious venues, there is something for everyone. The Ryder cup gives us a platform to encourage more people and, in particular, our youngsters to take up the game. I very much welcome the range of initiatives that the Scottish Government has introduced to spark energy among our young people for the game. There are opportunities to volunteer at the event, and in that respect I welcome the minister’s announcement about the new Ryder cup volunteer support scheme, which will give up to 50 young people from across Scotland the opportunity to volunteer and provide financial support for that. On Monday, 16 lucky youngsters from across Scotland, including my constituent 14-year-old Maria Cowan, a pupil at the Douglas Ewart high school in Newton Stewart, had the fantastic chance to take on the 2014 Ryder cup captains and golfing legends Tom Watson and Paul McGinley. Maria Cowan’s golfing skills were developed through Scotland’s national junior programme, clubgolf, before she graduated to the Scottish golf development centre programme that is being supported by the Portpatrick Dunskey golf club and which enables some of south-west Scotland’s younger talent to receive coaching from top PGA professionals. I very much hope that Maria Cowan will go on to become one of the next generation’s golfing champions—who knows? Dumfries and Galloway is already planning how to maximise the economic and tourism benefits from the Ryder cup. It is a part of Scotland that is rich in golf courses. People can play at Southerness, a championship links course on the Solway coast, which, according to Golf Monthly—a magazine that I read avidly—is one of the top 100 courses in Britain and Ireland. Dumfries has four courses, or people can play in the surroundings of Bruce’s castle at Lochmaben or among the stunning scenery of Luce Bay at Wigtownshire County’s stunning links course. That is not to mention the three golf trails that can be followed—the tiger trail, the challenge trail and the little gems trail. I hope that many of the visitors who head to Gleneagles will bear in mind what Dumfries and Galloway has to offer in the way of hidden golfing gems. Given that many people will be travelling north through the region or through the Loch Ryan ports from Ireland and Northern Ireland, Dumfries and Galloway is ideally placed to add value to golf fans’ experience of Scotland. VisitScotland has certainly recognised that fact and has rolled out the gateway to golf scheme, which last year sold 4,000 rounds of golf, bringing in £85,000 to the participating clubs. So far, 18 of the region’s golf clubs are involved with the marketing project as well as 11 significant accommodation providers. On the wider legacy for the region, Dumfries and Galloway Council is looking at targeted delivery of the clubgolf programme to primary 5 classes using primary physical education specialists. Last year, 100 of Dumfries and Galloway’s primary schools participated, with a target of 100 per cent coverage of the region for 2014. Dumfries and Galloway’s active schools and community sport teams are looking to develop links with golf clubs to expand on clubgolf, and local and regional primary golf competitions are now included in the region’s physical education, physical activity and sport calendar. Next year’s Ryder cup at Gleneagles provides Scotland with huge opportunities to raise the general profile of golf as a sport and to embed the image of Scotland in the eyes of the world as the home of golf and a place that is resplendent with some of the best and most varied courses that can be found. In so doing, it will leave a genuine lasting legacy for the whole of Scotland in terms of education, volunteering, tourism, infrastructure and sport. I am therefore delighted that the Ryder cup will be back in Scotland next September.

I, too, congratulate my colleague Jim Eadie for securing the debate and ensuring that the University of Edinburgh is in no doubt about our support and our gratitude for what it has achieved in being ranked 17th in the world in the 2013-14 QS World University Rankings, which makes it the only Scottish university in the world’s top 20, where it competes alongside top universities in the States, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Harvard University and Boston University, as well as the universities of Oxford and Cambridge. As a graduate of the University of Edinburgh, I am immensely proud of what a huge achievement that is for the university, and it is a credit to the dedication, commitment and hard work of all the staff, students and researchers. Particular thanks should be given to the university’s principal, Professor Sir Timothy O’Shea, for his efforts in positioning the university as a leading global institution, which assures it—and, of course Scotland as a whole—of an international platform and allows it to attract world-class researchers through the Scottish Government’s global excellence initiative. In addition, his determination to widen access through programmes such as LEAPS—Lothian equal access programme for schools—ensures that students from schools and communities with no tradition of sending young people to the university now have the opportunity to attend one of the world’s leading universities. Its being ranked among the world’s top 20 universities testifies to the university’s growing international reputation and its recognition in key research areas, including the life sciences, digital health and care, and renewable energy. The global impact of the university’s research excellence in those areas is reflected by its considerable success in winning millions of pounds from national and international research competitions—not least from successive EU framework programmes. Through its participation in 325 FP7 projects to date, Edinburgh is consistently in the EU’s top 10 and the UK’s top five higher education institutions in terms of the number of participations in framework programme projects. It is the top university in Scotland in that regard. That tradition of international excellence in research is set to continue into the future. The University of Edinburgh is currently leading an international consortium bid to establish a European Institute of Innovation and Technology knowledge and innovation community—KIC—on healthy living and active ageing, which if successful will be financed from the new EU horizon 2020 funding programme. LifeKIC, as the Scotland-led KIC is called, will focus on developing new digital health technology through telehealth and telecare initiatives that will, when implemented, allow EU citizens to lead healthy, active and independent lives as they age, as well as through new models of health and social care integration. The first call for new KIC proposals is scheduled for early next year. Through professors Mark Parsons and Stuart Anderson, the university—with the support of Professor George Crooks, who is the medical director of NHS 24, the new digital health institute that is based at the university, along with others such as Scotland Europa, Scottish Enterprise and the Scottish Government—has been working tirelessly to build a team Scotland approach and to bring in other partners in Denmark, Spain, Italy and Germany to act as co-location nodes within lifeKIC. If successful, the Scotland/UK part of lifeKIC will be hosted in Edinburgh and the overall KIC will be headquartered there. That will enable the university to participate as an innovation hub and to act as a centre of excellence that integrates higher education, research and business activities. As lifeKIC is the only Scotland/UK-led KIC bid, I ask the cabinet secretary to liaise with the UK Government Minister of State for Universities and Science, David Willetts, to ensure that the UK Government supports the taking forward of the bid in Brussels. By any metric, the University of Edinburgh is one of the world’s premier research and teaching universities. That it has achieved such a status testifies to the hard work and abilities of the staff, the energy of the students and the leadership of the principal. Scotland enjoys an enviable reputation as one of the world’s great centres of research and learning—a reputation that the University of Edinburgh’s successes ensure will continue.

I am delighted to speak in this important debate about the future of our country. A year from now, people in Scotland will have the opportunity to vote for independence—a vote that will allow our citizens to take control of their destiny and build a Scotland that reflects their values and aspirations and their principles of economic and social justice. Independence is about ensuring that the Scottish Parliament has all the powers that it needs to shape the economic and social future of this country. It is about ensuring that the decisions that affect the people who live and work here are taken in a Parliament that is elected by and directly accountable to the people in Scotland. It is about safeguarding our citizens from Westminster policies that seem intent on punishing the weak and the most vulnerable in our society while spending billions of pounds on a nuclear arsenal that is based on the Clyde. Independence is about guaranteeing that our young people will have opportunities to build their future here in Scotland by maintaining access to our universities on the principle of the ability to learn and not the ability to pay; and by making available a training or apprenticeship place for all young people between the ages of 16 and 19 who are not already in education, employment or training. Despite our best efforts in this Parliament, we will not achieve the truly radical transformation in Scotland’s economy and society that the people in Scotland are calling on the Parliament to deliver unless we, as a Parliament, are equipped with the powers that we need to do so. That means giving the Parliament powers over taxation and welfare policy, which I argue is essential if we are to address the deep-seated problems that continue to afflict many in our society. We need powers that allow us to reverse the welfare reforms that have been introduced by Westminster, and powers that allow us to tackle the glaring inequalities in income and health that continue to divide our society and compromise our shared commitment to social justice. With independence, the Parliament will have those powers, and others, which will allow Scotland’s Government—of whatever political persuasion—to change for the better the direction of travel of our economy and society. As my colleagues have done, I urge people in Scotland to look at what the Government and the Parliament have achieved in the policy areas where it has the powers to govern for our people. People should consider, for instance, the wholly different directions of travel of the NHS north and south of the border and ask which NHS model people in Scotland favour. I have no doubt that an overwhelming majority in Scotland support the Government’s commitment to a model of healthcare that is free at the point of care for everyone and that rejects the creeping privatisation that is changing and, I suggest, undermining the face of the NHS and the delivery of healthcare south of the border. In protecting Scotland’s NHS, the Scottish Government has demonstrated what can be achieved when the Parliament has the appropriate powers. For example, the Government has remained true to the founding principles of our national health service by abolishing prescription charges and removing an unfair tax on ill-health—so benefiting people with long-term conditions such as diabetes, asthma and Crohn’s disease—by introducing free eye tests for all and by providing free personal and nursing care for our elderly citizens. The health of our nation is about much more than the delivery of medical care. It is about enacting legislation that prohibits smoking in public places and changes the difficult and unhealthy relationship that Scotland has with alcohol, and it is about introducing policies that mitigate the level of demand on our public services by improving the general level of the health of our citizens—the preventative element of healthcare. Those are positive measures that we in the Parliament have taken and continue to take. Since 1999, successive Scottish Governments have worked to improve the health of our nation and maintain a national health service in Scotland that is fit for purpose. They have demonstrated what can be done when the power to act rests with this Parliament. If we are to do more, however, and tackle the inequalities in income and opportunity in our country that underlie many of the health problems that we suffer as a society, as well as avoid what I consider will be the negative healthcare consequences that will result from the UK Government’s welfare policies, and if we are to create the jobs that we need to grow our economy and raise the quality of life in Scotland—be in no doubt, that is what the people in Scotland expect and deserve—we must have the powers to do so. Those are powers that we lack at present, and powers that only independence will give to the Parliament. Scotland has an abundance of resources and talent and can more than afford to be a successful and thriving independent country. That is why I am confident that, a year from now, the Scottish people will choose that all of the decisions that affect Scotland should be taken by the people who care about Scotland the most: the people who live and work here. I support the motion in the First Minister’s name.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what consideration it is giving to methods of providing broadband access to the hardest-to-reach remote rural communities in south Scotland. (S4O-02377)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that this issue is being followed closely in rural south-west Scotland, where many of the most rural communities currently have very slow connection speeds. With a possible viable interim measure being distributed satellite broadband, will the Government look at ways of supporting communities that might feel that to be an option for them?

We know now that a majority of Scots want the Scottish Parliament to have control of decisions over the economy and welfare—

Will the finance secretary say what he would have been able to do differently with the budget if he had had those powers?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that Dumfries and Galloway Council’s application for support under the Bellwin scheme to help it to meet the costs of the severe weather in March as an emergency was deemed to be ineligible under the scheme’s rules. In that instance, both the threshold for assistance and the criteria were against the council, which nevertheless accumulated considerable costs as a result of the weather. Will the cabinet secretary look at what may still be done to support Dumfries and Galloway Council through other methods?

I am delighted to speak in support of the Government’s programme. Today marks the beginning of a parliamentary year that will take us to within touching distance of the biggest decision that Scotland will take in 300 years. In next September’s referendum, people in Scotland will be asked to choose between two futures. One is the status quo, whereby the power to determine Scotland’s future will be retained in Westminster and exercised by a Government that Scotland’s voters did not elect and which imposes on Scotland economic and social policies that our people do not support and that harm the weakest and most vulnerable in our society. The bedroom tax, which many members mentioned, is just one example of the unfair and unjust measures that a Westminster Government has imposed on Scotland. The alternative future, which I believe the people in Scotland will support, is one in which our people are governed from a Scottish Parliament that they elected and which represents their interests. It is a Parliament that since 1999 has demonstrated its ability to deliver policies that reflect the values of Scottish society, as Bruce Crawford said in his excellent speech. It is a Parliament whose policies underline what has been, to date, a shared commitment to protecting the weak and vulnerable in our society and to creating a dynamic economy that can generate jobs and prosperity for our people. It is a Parliament that adheres to the principle of universality in delivering essential public services that reflect the strong moral and ethical underpinning of our collective approach to the government of Scotland. Today’s programme for government embodies and reflects those objectives and values. Although we are debating the Government’s programme for the future, it is appropriate to reflect on what this Parliament has achieved with the limited powers that are at its disposal. For example, we introduced the ban on smoking in public places, we retained universal benefits in the form of free personal and nursing care for the elderly, benefiting more than 77,000 older people, we introduced free eye examinations for all and we abolished prescription charges. In doing all that, this Parliament has delivered a national health service for the people in Scotland that remains free at the point of need and that has not begun—and I hope never will begin—a process that many people think will mean that the NHS south of the border is increasingly driven by the dictates of the marketplace and not patients’ needs or the decisions that are made in general practitioners’ consulting rooms or hospital wards. It is clear from those examples that people in Scotland benefit the most when decisions about Scotland are taken in Scotland. The programme for government set out today by the First Minister will build on the achievements so far—and nowhere more than in relation to our public health. This parliamentary year will see the passage of the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill to permit the integration of health and social care services, which will improve greatly the health and wellbeing of our people and which, along with the prioritisation of preventative spending, demonstrates this Government’s commitment to adhere to the principles set out by the Christie commission in its report on the future of public service delivery. That agenda will be taken forward under the programme for government through legislation to improve the operation and efficiency of mental health legislation for service users and practitioners—the mental health and adults with incapacity bill—which I welcome greatly and which will help to protect our vulnerable, and through provision to establish Scotland’s own food safety and standards body called food standards Scotland, which will help us to address the significant food-related health challenges that Scotland faces, with consumer protection being paramount. I am also particularly pleased that, unlike the Westminster Government, the Scottish Government will continue to move forward with its plans to introduce plain packaging for cigarettes and other tobacco products. I firmly believe that to be one of the most important public health measures that can be taken in this country. It is a matter of some regret that the UK Government has decided not to proceed with legislation on that. Our nation’s health and wellbeing is one of the most important matters for which this Parliament has legislative responsibility. I believe that it is one in which the Parliament has had a genuinely impressive track record throughout the period since 1999. The measures outlined by the First Minister in the programme for government will build on that track record and demonstrate that this Government and this Parliament can continue to deliver for the people in Scotland. It remains the case that if this Parliament is to build fully on those successes and be in a position to tackle all the underlying causes of our public health problems, not least the considerable inequality in income that has come to characterise this country under successive Westminster Governments, this Parliament must have access to the full range of economic and social policy powers. That is what independence is all about. It is not about empowering the SNP or this Government; rather, it is about empowering this Parliament to take the decisions and make the policies that are right for the people in Scotland. It is about putting the people first and ensuring that the politicians for whom they vote have the powers that they need to deliver the policies that they want and to create the type of Scotland in which they want to live. I welcome the Scottish Government’s programme and am looking forward to 18 September next year, when we will have the opportunity as a nation to take control of our own destiny and to begin to build a Scotland that reflects our values, our aspirations and our principles.

I congratulate Alex Fergusson on bringing a fantastic challenge to the chamber and thereby securing the Parliament’s recognition of Dalbeattie high school students and staff for taking part in that unique challenge, in which they will represent Scotland in a competition of truly international proportions. I am also delighted that students from Dalbeattie have made it to the Parliament and are here to listen to the debate. I join Alex Fergusson in welcoming them to the chamber. I am sure that most of us will not have heard much about the da Vinci decathlon before, because it originated in Australia and made its way to Dalbeattie through an exchange programme, as Alex Fergusson said. That seems to have been one of those fortunate coincidences that has opened up a new opportunity for students. In starting to find out a bit more about the da Vinci decathlon, one of the things that struck me was the sheer breadth of knowledge and skill that it requires competitors to demonstrate. As Alex Fergusson mentioned, each team of eight students must complete tasks in art and poetry, cartography, code breaking, English, engineering, mathematics and chess, philosophy, science and general knowledge, as well as being tested on whether they are creative producers. That list is more than a little daunting. Every team member has to play a part in each task, so they all require a good working knowledge of all the subjects. To my mind, that makes the challenge all the more difficult. I am not entirely sure how many of us would necessarily excel if faced with such a task list. That underlines my admiration for the school: not only is it prepared to try something new, but its students will, in effect, be representing the whole of Scotland in October. This is not just a good competition in its own right. In adopting the da Vinci decathlon, Dalbeattie high school has found an intellectual competition and an ethos that fits well with our curriculum for excellence and the future direction of Scottish education. After all, curriculum for excellence has at its core the promotion of a broad general education and interdisciplinary learning and it instils in our young people the transferable skills that they are likely to need in a world in which many people switch careers regularly and the job for life has become increasingly rare. The idea that people should be familiar with a wide variety of knowledge is perfectly captured by the event’s title. Naming any academic event after Leonardo da Vinci—the original Renaissance man and probably the greatest polymath in history—is ambitious to say the least. The ambition that that represents is very much in line with our aspirations to have an education system that is internationally respected. The da Vinci decathlon is something that other Scottish schools should consider for the future. I applaud Dalbeattie high school for being the first to try it, but it is a competition and the more competitors there are the better. I hope to visit Dalbeattie high school soon. I am sorry that I have not got there sooner because I know that the da Vinci challenge is not the only exciting initiative that the school is working on. When I do so, I very much hope that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning will join me. I join everyone in congratulating Sue Bain and Piers Butler at Dalbeattie high school for taking on the decathlon challenge. Most of all, I wish the very best of luck to the high school students who will be taking part in October in Milan. We are all rooting for them.

The cabinet secretary may be aware that Dumfries and Galloway Council participated in the European Union-funded rural transport solutions project, which was piloted in Wigtownshire. That brought together various public and third sector partners, including the south-west of Scotland transport partnership, NHS Dumfries and Galloway, the Scottish Ambulance Service and Wigtownshire community transport, to address transport issues in a vast rural area, particularly with regard to health and social care services. Will the cabinet secretary look at the project’s evaluation report, which was published in February, to assess whether it could be rolled out on a larger scale?

I am delighted to be speaking in support of the minister’s motion. I believe that the Government has ambitious plans to create a lifelong habit of sporting activity, with all the social and health benefits that accompany a more physically active lifestyle. The notable success of Scottish athletes in the 2012 Olympics and Paralympics has helped to raise the profile of sport across Scotland already, but we also have a fantastic opportunity for the whole country in next year’s Commonwealth games not only to encourage talented young sportsmen and women to succeed but to encourage all our young people to be more physically active and to see participation in sport as something for them all. I therefore warmly welcome the Government’s commitment to deliver a youth sports strategy. We know that physical activity is important and that around 48 per cent of Scottish adults actively undertake the recommended minimum weekly levels of physical activity. However, 73 per cent of our children meet the minimum levels, a figure which includes an increase in the percentage of girls doing 60 minutes of moderate activity every day, which is encouraging. That is important since, as the minister said earlier, physical inactivity contributes to 2,500 deaths a year, which has a significant financial cost to our NHS. Indeed, it would be fair to say that increasing their levels of physical activity is one of the most effective measures that anyone can take to help protect their long-term health prospects. It is key to our preventative health agenda. I want to reflect on what some of the national policy direction looks like at a local level, since it is at that level that young people can most readily engage in sport. In Dumfries and Galloway, the local authority has integrated its active schools and community sports programmes, so that, where there was once a division between what was provided in a school setting and what happened in the wider community, there is now a joined-up approach. Active school officers are responsible for sporting activity from pre-school fun to working with teenagers and community sports clubs. I am advised that that arrangement is the first of its sort in Scotland, and I hope that the minister will consider it when preparing the draft strategy. Using that structure, Dumfries and Galloway is already embracing the spirit of the Olympics and the Commonwealth games through its active games, which took place for the first time last year. Active games, which are badged “A Games for Dumfries and Galloway”, are linked to both the London 2012 and Glasgow 2014 legacies. The 2012 active games saw 450 children compete in eight sports across three venues, and the events received funding support from EventScotland, Legacy 2014 and high-profile local sponsors. The games were designed to involve all of a geographically widespread region, with every cluster of primary schools competing in the qualifying events and heats. This year, children will compete in athletics, cycling, badminton, swimming, gymnastics, netball, tag rugby and swimming. The final will be held on Saturday 7 September in Dumfries, and I very much hope that it will eclipse last year’s success. Dumfries and Galloway is not only off to a good start with its active games. Working with sportscotland, the local authority is rolling out 3G artificial sports pitches in strategic locations, all of which have an element of community sports club involvement in the administration and operation of the facilities as well as in their use. The use of school facilities, to which the minister referred, is also taking shape. For example, the new Dalbeattie learning campus is likely to have a climbing wall built into its specifications because there is currently no such facility anywhere in the region. Community use will be specifically designed into the new campus. In addition to all that, Dumfries and Galloway has been establishing itself as a destination for international competition in its own right. The Dumfries ice bowl, which is an absolutely fantastic facility, will host the world mixed doubles curling championship and world senior men’s and women’s curling championships next year. More than 30 senior teams from around the world are expected to compete, along with a similar number of mixed doubles teams. The same venue will host the under-20 world ice hockey championship this year and the under-18 world ice hockey championship next March, having successfully hosted the women’s under-18 world championship qualification tournament in October last year—an event that I remember very well, as I was there for the opening game. I am sure that all those responsible for the hard work that has secured the growing reputation as a venue for international events would be pleased to welcome the minister at one of those events, should her diary allow. That is an important achievement for Dumfries and Galloway and one that I fully support. It is also important because, like the Commonwealth games, it brings elite-level sport closer to home, which is important for our young people. I believe that encouraging our young people across the board into greater participation in sport is a valuable and worthwhile aim. It will be good for our health and wellbeing and will show clear benefits in long-term health prospects for the population. It is also fun, and I cannot think of anything better than encouraging our children to have fun. There is good work under way already. The examples that I have highlighted demonstrate that that is the case. We are approaching 2014 with solid local activity already enthusing our children and young people. I very much hope that Glasgow’s bid to hold the youth Olympics in 2018 is successful on 4 July. I believe that that is a positive starting point and I am happy to support the motion in Shona Robison’s name.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate on the important issue of chronic pain. I am pleased to see so many people in the public gallery to listen to the debate. Significant pain is reported to be experienced by 14 per cent of our population, with 6 per cent suffering severe chronic pain that has a major impact on their quality of life, employment, daily activities, mood, sleep and all aspects of their general health and wellbeing. Chronic pain is a sensitive and deeply personal subject for those who suffer it and for their loved ones, who often suffer with them and can feel powerless to help. I am therefore genuinely pleased to see the commitment that the Government has outlined to deliver high-quality chronic pain services at every level of care. The Scottish service model for chronic pain, for example, will greatly assist patients’ understanding of what support is available and will give clinicians and healthcare professionals the knowledge and structure to direct patients and allow consistent care pathways to be followed. I further welcome the Government’s commitment to provide a highly specialised pain management service and today’s announcement of a public consultation on the options for the future delivery of the service. The new service for Scotland will be a strong addition to the services that are necessary to meet the many and complex needs of those with a debilitating chronic condition that can devastate the lives of patients if appropriate support is not available. I will highlight the progressive initiatives that are taking place in Dumfries and Galloway, which show how the Scottish service model for chronic pain is being implemented based on specific local needs and circumstances. Since its formation in April 2012, NHS Dumfries and Galloway’s chronic pain improvement group has worked well. Each of its five sub-groups has developed a range of projects to improve the chronic pain care pathway. An important element of the improvement work is the upskilling of local staff. Twenty physiotherapy staff have recently undergone a two-day cognitive behaviour training course and community pharmacies have participated in training sessions on chronic pain. Pharmacies have also circulated patient questionnaires to people who are prescribed medication for chronic pain, and the responses will be fed into the patient involvement sub-group. NHS Dumfries and Galloway has agreed to create an additional health psychologist post, with two sessions a week for chronic pain. In addition to working with patients, the postholder will, crucially, cover the education of general practitioners and other clinicians. Arrangements are also in place for GPs and community physiotherapists to use the much-praised electronic referral system to refer patients directly to Pain Association Scotland, which has a funded service agreement with the health board. It is key to assist people to manage chronic pain themselves not only by making sure that the necessary support and advice are there but by giving them the tools to do it themselves, when appropriate. That is as much about empowerment as it is about prescribing. Such examples are being replicated across the country. Some boards are further forward than others in developing their local service delivery plans for implementing the model, but it is important to emphasise that progress is being made and that that is a significant step towards ensuring equity of access to chronic pain services and support across all levels of primary, secondary and tertiary care. Prior to consultation, the NHS is working with partners, including patients and clinicians, to assess appropriate options. Addressing the needs of patients at the pinnacle of the Kaiser Permanente pyramid can be challenging. Consultation, especially with the small number of patients who have the most severe needs, is vital to ensure the most appropriate targeted use of resources and to deliver equity of service for that highly specialised group of patients. Therefore, I especially welcome the Government’s decision to include appropriate residential accommodation in the options for the intensive pain management service. That is fundamental in ensuring that patients get the support that they need from the intensive service. It is vital that the service offers as non-medicalised a routine as possible and that any accommodation reflects normal aspects of daily living, because that helps patients to maintain progress when they return home. Services need to be person centred. All the measures in the Government motion add focus and positive direction to chronic pain services, not only at the highly specialised intensive end of the spectrum but in prevention and secondary care. With the publication today of the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill, which is to integrate adult health and social care, that approach will help to reduce health inequalities and empower patients with chronic pain to have as full a life as possible. I think that everyone in the chamber recognises the importance of delivering high-quality services for chronic pain sufferers—there can be nothing more personal than pain. Although improvements have been made in service provision since 2007, it is equally clear that the Government is resolute on the need to accelerate the delivery of further improvement throughout the spectrum of treatment. That is a work in progress, but I am confident that we are heading in the right direction. I support the Government’s motion.

First, I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on securing the debate. I must also give my apologies, as I will have to leave the chamber before the minister responds to attend to an urgent constituency matter. I attended Laura and Paul Macadam-Slater’s recent presentation to MSPs, which made a very good case for making life-saving public AEDs more widely available across Scotland, and I very much support what they are trying to achieve. Members will have reflected on the statistics, but they are worth repeating. For the 70 per cent of sudden cardiac arrests that occur outside a hospital environment, there is about a one in 20 chance of survival. I was very struck by that statistic; I was not aware of it before and it has certainly made me think. Although sudden cardiac arrests are clearly very dangerous, they are treatable, and defibrillation is the accepted method of treatment. Chances of survival dramatically increase if defibrillation is delivered quickly but decrease equally dramatically with every minute that treatment is delayed. Given that, as Margaret Mitchell pointed out, AEDs are easy to use—indeed, they can be used by someone with no medical training at all—the argument seems clear that the provision of AEDs in public places might very well make a significant difference. As for international comparisons, some countries have had a comprehensive roll-out of publicly available AEDs, while others are at various stages of development. Hong Kong, for example, is rolling out 300 AEDs in public locations, but the lion’s share of the plaudits must go to New Zealand, which, with a population similar to Scotland’s, has 2,941 publicly available AEDs and a fantastic online interactive map that shows people exactly where they are. For me, that is particularly instructive. Many AEDs are located in health centres, hospitals and fire stations, where we might expect them to be, but there are also many in private businesses, residential addresses, dental surgeries and even boats, all of which are registered online and visible on the map. Margaret Mitchell’s motion refers to rural areas in particular. In Dumfries and Galloway, some moves have already been made by individual communities towards the wider provision of AEDs. Some community councils have used community benefit money from wind farms to purchase defibrillators, which are available in public buildings such as village halls and shops. Other communities are participating in the Scottish Ambulance Service’s volunteer first responders scheme. As well as basic first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation—CPR—training, an AED is a crucial part of a first responder’s equipment. Although such AEDs are not publicly available, they are ultra-local and can cut response times dramatically. First responders teams are established and running in a number of Galloway’s remoter communities. It is by no means very remote, but Dalbeattie is setting up a group that will provide an out-of-hours first responders service to almost 5,000 people. All that activity is welcome, but it relies, of course, on individuals and groups recognising the importance of the issue and being prepared to act. In closing, I will mention training and awareness. Conversations with the British Heart Foundation have established that a good number of Dumfries and Galloway’s secondary schools and some of its primary schools have had heartstart training. To complete the equation, we need the equipment—that is for sure—but also public awareness. I am very pleased that we are having the debate and highlighting the issue. I am particularly grateful to Margaret Mitchell for securing the debate. I wish Laura and Paul Macadam-Slater every success with their campaign, and I hope that, in time, we will see many more publicly available AEDs across Scotland. I also commend the efforts of North Lanarkshire Council.

Given that, as we all know, it is important for breast cancer to be detected and diagnosed as early as possible to give greater chance of more successful treatment, can the cabinet secretary provide an update on what impact the groundbreaking breast cancer campaign featuring Elaine C Smith that he mentioned earlier has had in raising awareness of breast cancer symptoms since its launch last September?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. I welcome Clare Adamson’s and Liam McArthur’s points about the need for more female role models in science. That is why I was pleased to see that the National Library of Scotland recently celebrated some remarkable Scottish women of science—most of whom remain largely unknown today—during the Edinburgh science festival. I want to focus on a number of areas, not least scientific research, which is one of the key drivers of economic growth. Scotland boasts some of the world’s finest scientific research facilities—in our universities, our specialist research centres and high-tech and innovative companies, many of which are small and medium-sized enterprises—and the world-class nature of Scotland’s scientific research also attracts world-leading companies to invest here, further enhancing our economic opportunities. However, the real challenge that we face is to transform the excellence of our scientific research into commercial opportunities that translate into jobs and growth for Scotland as a whole. That is one of the Scottish Government’s key priorities and it is one in which it is having considerable success. Science and scientific research can play a major part in reviving and energising our communities. We can see that at work in the south-west of Scotland. The first week in May saw Dumfries and Galloway’s own science festival, which included a wide variety of events and demonstrations that were run by the University of Glasgow, the Glasgow science centre, Heriot-Watt University and the Glasgow science festival at a variety of locations across the region. The festival—now in its fourth year—is one of those that are funded by the Scottish Government to raise the profile of science with children and young people and also to encourage greater engagement and enthusiasm about the future in their own communities. Dumfries and Galloway was also home for one of the less well-known figures of Scottish science—one who had a truly international reach and significance. I refer, of course, to James Clerk Maxwell, who grew up at Glenlair house near Corsock, returned there in later life and is buried in Parton kirkyard. As far as physics is concerned, Maxwell is up there with Newton and Einstein. Einstein himself said of Maxwell’s work that it was “the most profound and the most fruitful that physics has experienced since the time of Newton”. Both Galloway and Scotland should be proud of someone who was acknowledged by the towering figures of science as one of their own. I hope that we can work wider recognition of Maxwell’s achievements into the already substantial list of notable Scottish scientists and engineers as a further way to encourage our young people into science and enhance their understanding. I certainly concur with Liam McArthur’s earlier comments about James Clerk Maxwell and the international year of light. In the present, too, Galloway has much to offer, particularly in the natural sciences and astronomy. Galloway is, for example, the only part of Britain to have dark skies park status. Imagine how entrancing it would be to look at the stars with the sort of clarity, detail and freedom from light pollution that the Glasgow science centre’s planetarium offers, but to do so on a warm summer night in the Galloway countryside. It is that sort of experience that might inspire Scotland’s next James Clerk Maxwell. We also have the Galloway and southern Ayrshire biosphere. As a project that is designed to examine how people interact with the natural environment, the biosphere has huge scope for embedding scientific research and development into the wider considerations of landscape, rurality and economic development. The biosphere also has natural synergies with the Crichton Carbon Centre and the recently launched Crichton institute, which has as a key aim the creation of “a portfolio of high quality, regionally focussed and internationally significant studies.” Such ventures are important, because the clearer it is to our young people that Scotland is the place to be for research and innovation, the easier it will be to encourage the next generation of scientists. We know that internationally recognised research leads to investment in economic growth. In biosciences alone, there have been very substantial investments into research and development. The recent announcement of £30 million for three innovation centres for stratified medicine, the development of state-of-the-art imaging equipment and the development of digital health technologies illustrates how Scotland is recognised as a country in which serious research and development of international significance is happening. Given the £100 million investment in the partnership between BioCity Scotland and the University of Dundee that will result in Scotland being at the heart of international efforts to discover new drug treatments, one has to conclude that Scotland is a natural destination for top-quality research and development. Of course, there is always more that can be done and there is further potential for Scotland to lead the way by creating a knowledge and innovation community focused on healthy and active ageing. The demographics of the western world—not just Scotland—make that a vital area of research. The KICs are part of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology, and their purpose is to integrate higher education, research and business in areas of high societal need. So far, there are only three KICs, which are focused on climate change, information technology and sustainable energy. To my mind, there is a clear gap in the market there that Scotland is ideally placed to fill. In conclusion, we have a great deal to offer the world in natural and life sciences, whether through innovation centres or through a world-leading knowledge and innovation community on healthy and active ageing. All of that matters because one reason for promoting science through all the projects that the minister mentioned is that science is fundamentally important to the future of our nation. I support the motion in Alasdair Allan’s name.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. I welcome Clare Adamson’s and Liam McArthur’s points about the need for more female role models in science. That is why I was pleased to see that the National Library of Scotland recently celebrated some remarkable Scottish women of science—most of whom remain largely unknown today—during the Edinburgh science festival. I want to focus on a number of areas, not least scientific research, which is one of the key drivers of economic growth. Scotland boasts some of the world’s finest scientific research facilities—in our universities, our specialist research centres and high-tech and innovative companies, many of which are small and medium-sized enterprises—and the world-class nature of Scotland’s scientific research also attracts world-leading companies to invest here, further enhancing our economic opportunities. However, the real challenge that we face is to transform the excellence of our scientific research into commercial opportunities that translate into jobs and growth for Scotland as a whole. That is one of the Scottish Government’s key priorities and it is one in which it is having considerable success. Science and scientific research can play a major part in reviving and energising our communities. We can see that at work in the south-west of Scotland. The first week in May saw Dumfries and Galloway’s own science festival, which included a wide variety of events and demonstrations that were run by the University of Glasgow, the Glasgow Science Centre, Heriot-Watt University and the Glasgow science festival at a variety of locations across the region. The festival—now in its fourth year—is one of those that are funded by the Scottish Government to raise the profile of science with children and young people and also to encourage greater engagement and enthusiasm about the future in their own communities. Dumfries and Galloway was also home for one of the less well-known figures of Scottish science—one who had a truly international reach and significance. I refer, of course, to James Clerk Maxwell, who grew up at Glenlair house near Corsock, returned there in later life and is buried in Parton kirkyard. As far as physics is concerned, Maxwell is up there with Newton and Einstein. Einstein himself said of Maxwell’s work that it was “the most profound and the most fruitful that physics has experienced since the time of Newton”. Both Galloway and Scotland should be proud of someone who was acknowledged by the towering figures of science as one of their own. I hope that we can work wider recognition of Maxwell’s achievements into the already substantial list of notable Scottish scientists and engineers as a further way to encourage our young people into science and enhance their understanding. I certainly concur with Liam McArthur’s earlier comments about James Clerk Maxwell and the international year of light. In the present, too, Galloway has much to offer, particularly in the natural sciences and astronomy. Galloway is, for example, the only part of Britain to have dark skies park status. Imagine how entrancing it would be to look at the stars with the sort of clarity, detail and freedom from light pollution that the Glasgow Science Centre’s planetarium offers, but to do so on a warm summer night in the Galloway countryside. It is that sort of experience that might inspire Scotland’s next James Clerk Maxwell. We also have the Galloway and southern Ayrshire biosphere. As a project that is designed to examine how people interact with the natural environment, the biosphere has huge scope for embedding scientific research and development into the wider considerations of landscape, rurality and economic development. The biosphere also has natural synergies with the Crichton Carbon Centre and the recently launched Crichton institute, which has as a key aim the creation of “a portfolio of high quality, regionally focussed and internationally significant studies.” Such ventures are important, because the clearer it is to our young people that Scotland is the place to be for research and innovation, the easier it will be to encourage the next generation of scientists. We know that internationally recognised research leads to investment in economic growth. In biosciences alone, there have been very substantial investments into research and development. The recent announcement of £30 million for three innovation centres for stratified medicine, the development of state-of-the-art imaging equipment and the development of digital health technologies illustrates how Scotland is recognised as a country in which serious research and development of international significance is happening. Given the £100 million investment in the partnership between BioCity Scotland and the University of Dundee that will result in Scotland being at the heart of international efforts to discover new drug treatments, one has to conclude that Scotland is a natural destination for top-quality research and development. Of course, there is always more that can be done and there is further potential for Scotland to lead the way by creating a knowledge and innovation community focused on healthy and active ageing. The demographics of the western world—not just Scotland—make that a vital area of research. The KICs are part of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology, and their purpose is to integrate higher education, research and business in areas of high societal need. So far, there are only three KICs, which are focused on climate change, information technology and sustainable energy. To my mind, there is a clear gap in the market there that Scotland is ideally placed to fill. In conclusion, we have a great deal to offer the world in natural and life sciences, whether through innovation centres or through a world-leading knowledge and innovation community on healthy and active ageing. All of that matters because one reason for promoting science through all the projects that the minister mentioned is that science is fundamentally important to the future of our nation. I support the motion in Alasdair Allan’s name.

I am delighted to lead this evening’s debate in celebration of the Mull of Galloway Community Trust’s efforts to buy the iconic location on behalf of, and for the benefit of, the local community. I am particularly pleased that one of the directors of the trust, Maureen Chand, and her partner Sami have made the lengthy journey from the most southerly part of the Scottish mainland to be with us tonight in the public gallery to listen to the debate. The deputy leader of Dumfries and Galloway Council, Brian Collins, is also with us in the gallery. Two other directors of the trust, Steve and Kathleen Hardy, wanted very much to be here. They have worked tirelessly, as have all the trust members, to make the mull a success as a visitor attraction and to develop their ambitious bid for the future. They have done so while, latterly, Kathleen has been undergoing treatment for cancer, which is the reason why they could not be here. What I have to say this evening is dedicated to them. I sought the debate to support the trust’s efforts to secure funding for the buyout. This morning’s news that its bid to the Scottish land fund has been successful grants the trust 95 per cent of the value of the land. As will become clear, I have every confidence that the trust will secure the remaining 5 per cent with little difficulty. That is a fantastic step forward for the project, and I cannot begin to express how delighted I am that, tonight, we really can say that history is being made at the Mull of Galloway. There is nowhere else in Scotland quite like the Mull of Galloway. It is a wild and romantic place in any weather, with stunning views on a good day—from views of the Mourne mountains in Northern Ireland to views of Snaefell on the Isle of Man and the fells of the lake district. I have experienced the mull in all weathers. It is certainly dramatic when it is blowing a hoolie and the waves are crashing against the impressive rocky cliffs: it really feels like it is just you pitted against the elements. The mull is also a nature reserve and site of special scientific interest. People can spot a wide variety of birds there, as well as—if they are fortunate—dolphins, porpoises and even whales. Of course, there is also the iconic lighthouse, which was designed by Robert Stevenson of Bell rock fame and completed in 1828. Steve Hardy is keen to replicate Edinburgh’s infamous 1 o’clock gun by bringing back into play the foghorn that was used as an extra warning to shipping up until 1987. Those are the fantastic assets that nature and history have given the mull, but the key ingredient that has taken it from being practically unknown to being a four-star visitor attraction is the community. We did not arrive at that point overnight or by accident. Twelve years of hard work by the South Rhins Community Development Trust took the Mull of Galloway—a place that people might visit if they knew about it and a place with next to no facilities for the visitor—and turned it into a four-star tourist attraction that still respects the unique wildness of its location. There are now three holiday cottages in the former lighthouse keepers’ accommodation, a visitor centre run by the RSPB in the building that accommodated the lighthouse builders, and the lighthouse exhibition itself, which has gathered the accolades of VisitScotland’s four-star visitor attraction and, in 2010, tourism champion in the Dumfries & Galloway Life awards, following that success with finalist positions in 2011 and 2012. In addition, private enterprise has mirrored the success of the trust, with the Gallie Craig coffee house and restaurant being built in 2004. Set into the hillside on the edge of the cliffs to minimise visual impact but maximise diners’ views—I know it well—it complements the rest of the location well and it won a green apple award for its construction and design. If members are planning their summer holidays this year and wondering where to go, I am sure that the Mull of Galloway would extend a warm welcome to them all. The Mull of Galloway Trust estimates that, directly or indirectly, the mull as a visitor attraction now supports 20 jobs in the local economy. Since that economy is, by its nature, remote and fragile, the mull now constitutes a major part of it. Therefore, the decision by the Northern Lighthouse Board to sell the estate, including the associated buildings, could be seen as a hammer-blow to a successful local initiative. However, the trust and the community are more resilient than that; they recognise the proposed sale as an opportunity to acquire the assets for the on-going good of the community and the economy, which it clearly benefits already. I was privileged to officiate at the counting of ballots in Drummore village hall in March. The 98 per cent vote in favour of the buyout convinced me absolutely of the place that the mull, and the enterprises associated with it, has in the hearts of the community. The new Mull of Galloway Trust, which is composed of many of the people who have already made the mull a success, is nothing if not ambitious. It recognises the unique selling point of a Stevenson lighthouse in good condition and which can be accessed by the public. Many Stevenson lighthouses are operational and have no public access or have been sold into private ownership. The trust has an excellent track record, with a lighthouse exhibition which has attracted 10,000 visitors a year since 2009. The trust’s vision for the Mull is one that plays to its strengths and assets. The trust envisages new development, such as a safe viewing platform built over the cliffs, recreational activities for all ages that capitalise on the wildlife and landscape and educational events, and exhibitions on the history of lighthouses, marine safety and the natural environment. Renewable energy generation, such as solar panels and air-source heat pumps, will end the lighthouse complex’s reliance on expensive heating oil and lower its carbon footprint. It is that approach—protective of what is there, but keen to develop sustainability for the future—that the Scottish land fund’s award has helped to secure. Above all, this project is about realising the ambitions of the community. It is true that the community started with natural advantages, but the mull is miles from anywhere. It is almost as far off the beaten track as it is possible to get, and yet the community has already created an outstanding visitor attraction that is a major boost to the local economy. I believe that, with community ownership of the assets, the community can achieve even more. I also believe that the people best placed to look after such a special place are the people who live and work there. I intended this evening to invite the minister to visit the Mull of Galloway. I am immensely proud to be able to invite him to visit the mull in its new guise as the community-owned most southerly part of Scotland. Presiding Officer, thank you for enabling me to bring a bit of history here tonight.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made with the detect cancer early programme. (S4O-02075)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that comprehensive answer. Having had the privilege of visiting the teenage cancer unit at Gartnavel recently, I commend to the cabinet secretary a visit there to see just what a fantastic facility it is for helping our young people to fight cancer. Will he join me in applauding the important work that is being done by the Teenage Cancer Trust through schools, colleges and universities in helping to raise awareness among young people of the importance of early cancer detection so that they can discuss cancer and the benefits of early presentation with their peers and older family members in an informed way?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in support of Alex Neil’s amendment, and want to focus my four minutes on the specific longer-term healthcare and social care challenges that face Scotland as a society and which the Scottish people will look to MSPs to address and resolve together. Let us be clear: it is a mark of our success as a society that our citizens are living longer and healthier lives. Also, the Scottish Government is determined, by reducing the health inequalities that continue to blight our communities, to improve the life expectancy of people who live in Scotland’s most deprived areas. However, as we all know, a rapidly increasing ageing population presents challenges, too—especially with more people living with multiple long-term conditions and complex support needs. The Government recognises that, which is why it is changing how the NHS delivers care, why it is focusing on outcomes, why it is redesigning services around the patient, and why it is placing the patient’s journey at the centre of everything that the NHS does. The very welcome announcement today of a new bed-management tool underlines the Government’s commitment to ensuring that there is the necessary hospital capacity with the right type and number of beds and staff in the right places to support such changes and to help our boards to plan their services. We need, in order to reduce demands on the NHS, to continue to develop preventative measures, such as the detect cancer early programme, and to develop measures that decrease the incidence of avoidable lifestyle-related diseases, such as the decisive action that the Government is taking to introduce alcohol minimum unit pricing, which will help to save lives and address the pressures that are put on the NHS through the thousands of hospital admissions and attendances at accident and emergency departments that result from alcohol misuse. We need to develop measures that improve co-ordination between different elements of our healthcare and social care systems, measures that make it easier for our elderly people to continue to live fulfilling lives in their own homes and communities rather than in acute and institutional care, and measures that build capacity at very local level to provide proper care and attention to our most vulnerable people. The SNP Government has not only begun the reforms that are needed to implement those measures; it has already made significant progress in delivering tangible outcomes. However, no one is under any delusion about the scale of the challenges that we still face. The direct cuts that have been imposed on the Scottish budget by Westminster, and the potentially devastating impact of the welfare reforms that are being rolled out by the London Government are bound to increase the scale of the challenges that face sustainable delivery of high-quality healthcare and social care. By protecting the NHS budget, as we are committed to doing for the remainder of the current spending review period, by maintaining our commitment to there being no compulsory redundancies in the NHS, by investing in our NHS workforce, and by protecting the founding principles of the NHS, the Government is taking the appropriate steps to meet those unprecedented challenges. In conclusion, the SNP Government is committed to ensuring that “the level of quality and provision” of health and social care in our NHS, which the people of Scotland quite rightly expect and deserve, are maintained into the future. At a time of unprecedented challenges to our health and care system, I believe—I think the overwhelming majority of the Scottish public believes it, too—that our hard-working NHS staff and social care staff are due an immense vote of thanks for their dedication and professionalism. I also believe that the Government has the support of those health professionals in tackling the challenges ahead in a determined and robust manner. I support the cabinet secretary’s amendment.

What action is the Scottish Government taking to tackle the barriers that face women who want to work?

9. To ask the Scottish Government on what basis the share of UK debt to be assigned to an independent Scotland should be calculated. (S4O-02023)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, as it is now clear that Scotland has contributed significantly in excess of its per capita share of tax revenues to the UK Exchequer over many decades and received no return for that, that should be reflected in the calculations?

14. To ask the Scottish Government what support is available to ensure that the university, college and small and medium-sized enterprise sectors in Scotland are well placed to take advantage of the opportunities under the European Union’s horizon 2020 funding programme. (S4O-01998)

I thank the minister for that comprehensive answer. Does he agree that the engagement of Scottish universities in large-scale European projects is a benefit not only to the university sector but to the broader Scottish economy? In particular, the concentration of excellence in our Scottish university base allows Scotland to lead a European Institute of Innovation and Technology knowledge and innovation community bid in the forthcoming call for proposals.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made on the delivery of next-generation broadband for the south of Scotland. (S4O-01958)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that there are communities across the south of Scotland, in particular in Dumfries and Galloway, that do not have access to broadband at all yet. How will those communities benefit from the roll-out of next-generation broadband?

The minister will be aware that parts of Dumfries and Galloway were severely affected by the adverse weather and I am sure that he will join me in again commending the efforts of everyone involved in the emergency response. Dumfries and Galloway Council has applied to the Government for assistance under the Bellwin scheme. Will the Government look sympathetically at Dumfries and Galloway’s application?

I am pleased to speak in support of the Government’s motion. I am particularly pleased that the debate will be informed—at least from the SNP benches—by hard facts. I was going to say that even the Opposition parties would have great difficulty disputing the facts, but Opposition members have been disputing the facts this afternoon. I refer, of course, to the report, “Government Expenditure and Revenues Scotland 2011-2012”, which was published by the Office for National Statistics. The most recent GERS report records that in 2011-12 Scotland’s contribution to the UK Government’s revenues again exceeded the share of UK public spending that was attributed to Scotland by a staggering £4.4 billion, or £824 for every person in Scotland. It also demonstrates that in 2011-12 Scotland’s public finances were in much better shape than those of the UK as a whole and that, when expressed in headline budget terms, Scotland’s overall budget deficit equates to 5 per cent of GDP, compared with a UK deficit of almost 8 per cent. It is worth stressing not only that Scotland’s relative fiscal position is better than the UK position but that in 2011 Scotland’s budget deficit was lower than the average of the 36 advanced economies that are tracked by the International Monetary Fund. The 2011-12 data are not a fluke or a one-off result, as the GERS analysis demonstrates. Between 2007-08 and 2011-12, Scotland’s average fiscal deficit was 5.9 per cent of GDP, compared with 7.6 per cent for the UK as a whole. In other words, since the SNP took office in 2007, Scotland’s fiscal position has systematically outperformed that of the UK as a whole. That demonstrates not only the financial viability of an independent Scotland but the outstanding competence of our finance secretary, in stark contrast with the dismal performance of successive UK Labour and Tory chancellors over the same period.

No. I am sorry, but given the lack of vision, ambition and ideas in Opposition members’ speeches this afternoon, I will not be taking any interventions. [Interruption.] Well, it is about time that we got the facts on the record, which is what I will do with the time that I have left. It is preposterous to assert that an independent Scotland is not financially viable, as many members on the no side continue to do. As official data show, Scotland is more financially viable outside the UK than inside it. The fact is that Scotland’s population contributes much more to UK receipts than it receives back in expenditure. The GERS report shows that in 2011-12 Scotland contributed 9.9 per cent of all UK revenues but received only 9.3 per cent of total UK public expenditure—and with a population share of only 8.4 per cent. Scotland is more than paying its way. Doubters need not take only the word of the Office for National Statistics. A few weeks ago, the fiscal commission working group produced its first report on the macroeconomic framework under independence. That group, which included two Nobel laureates in economics, not only endorsed the financial viability of an independent Scotland but set out in considerable detail the economic policy options facing an independent Scotland to grow our economy and offered invaluable advice on establishing an appropriate framework for maximising the economic gains on offer from independence. Those economic gains include higher rates of economic growth, greater equality among our citizens and a stable framework for business and investors. The fiscal commission reminded us that, by international standards, Scotland is a wealthy and productive country, but we can become wealthier and more productive after independence because only then will we have the power to use the full range of economic policy levers to meet the challenges that we face and maximise the opportunities collectively available to us as a nation. If further proof of the merits of independence was required, surely it was provided by yesterday’s budget statement at Westminster, which laid bare the disastrous consequences of three years of botched policies—policies that continue to be supported by Tory and Liberal Democrat members of this Parliament. After an unprecedented triple-dip recession we learn that economic recovery is further postponed, that borrowing will rise even higher and that the discredited austerity drive will bite even deeper for our disadvantaged and vulnerable. Amid the economic and social wreckage, all we hear once again is the all-too-familiar Tory view that there is no alternative, although this time round the ranks of the Tory chorus line are augmented by Scotland’s Liberal Democrats. There is an alternative for Scotland and it is independence. The Opposition parties in this Parliament would have the people of Scotland believe that Scotland is too weak to be independent and that our wealth is based on a volatile natural resource that could suffer a calamitous loss in value overnight. For 40 years the people of Scotland have been duped about the scale and value of North Sea oil reserves, and that strategy continues today. At a time when investment in the North Sea is at its highest level in 30 years and expected to rise to £13 billion in 2013, we are expected to take seriously the better together proposition that oil revenue is a curse that we would be better off without. Given that oil reserves worth an estimated £1.5 trillion are still to be exploited, that is scaremongering and I doubt that many people will fall for it on this occasion. On Thursday 18 September 2014, the people of Scotland will face two choices: having more of the same failed policy imposed from Westminster, or putting the future of Scotland in the hands of those who live and work here and granting the Government of Scotland the powers that it needs to grow our economy and invest in our future. Scotland is not only financial strong; we have tremendous potential and if we are to make progress our Government needs the powers over economic and social policy that only independence will deliver. The Opposition parties tell us that Scotland cannot afford to be independent, but as the finance secretary has said, the reality is that Scotland cannot afford not to be independent.

The minister will welcome, as I do, the praise received this week from the United Kingdom Committee on Climate Change for the progress that Scotland is making in reaching its climate change, emissions reduction targets. What is the minister doing to encourage the European Union to move to a 30 per cent target?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate on a policy area that will be important to the way in which we deliver health and social care in the future. I also look forward to the detailed scrutiny of the bill by the Parliament, particularly as I am a member of the Health and Sport Committee. The cabinet secretary has already outlined some of the demographic challenges that face Scotland. There are areas of the country, such as Dumfries and Galloway, where the demographic trends towards a rising population of older people and a falling population of people of working age and children already outstrip the national figures. When those challenges are combined with the challenges of delivering high-quality health and social care in a largely rural environment, with many remote settlements, it is clear that change in the way in which we plan and deliver care is needed. Of course, the agenda is not only about delivering integrated care for our older people, although that is a worthy prize. Integration will also bring benefits for adults with multiple or complex conditions, as well as for those who live with long-term conditions. The system has become complicated and sometimes disjointed. It needs to be fully integrated, and the needs of the patient, rather than concerns about operational or corporate demarcation lines, need to be put first. I think that it is fair to emphasise that professionals who provide front-line care are already trying to carry out as much integration as they can. I recently visited Kirkcudbright community hospital, which occupies the same building as the GP surgery. The hospital deals primarily with discharges from the regional general hospital in Dumfries, and the local GPs—who are often the patients’ own family doctors—work closely with social services to smooth the transition from hospital back home and to put in place any continuing support that may be required. To me, that is an example of integration working already. Last week, I visited the Galloway community hospital in Stranraer, which is an altogether larger facility. Both hospitals have renal units, which enable patients to benefit from the three sessions of dialysis that they need every week without having to make the very lengthy journeys that they previously had to make to Dumfries. Both hospitals also provide services that match the specific needs and priorities of the local communities that they serve. In my view, the delivery of services closest to where people need them will be crucial to the success of integration. On both visits, I was struck by the enthusiasm that NHS staff and GPs have for the policy, which is a logical extension of the clinical practices that I have described. I believe that firm foundations already exist in Dumfries and Galloway. The forthcoming bill is intended to build on those firm foundations and to strengthen good practice by empowering front-line staff to deliver the better health outcomes that we seek. Prevention and anticipation must be at the heart of the integration policy. Integration is as much about helping people to avoid being admitted to hospital as it is about managing their return home. The Christie commission demonstrated that although everyone understood the importance of preventative spending, as a country we had not come to grips with the changes that that agenda demands. The Government has made it clear that its approach to legislation will be permissive rather than restrictive and that it will enable organisations to work together to take down barriers and build on the good practice that already exists. In my view, that collaborative approach must include the third and independent sectors in the design and planning of services. I know that, this morning, Dumfries and Galloway’s community health and social care partnership board took important decisions to move the integration agenda forward for the region. The willingness to embrace integration that I have seen on the front line is shared by the senior management and elected members of Dumfries and Galloway Council and the local NHS board. Those decisions include the decision to include representatives of the third and independent sectors on the project board that will take forward the detailed work on integration. I believe that the participation of the third and independent sectors in the development and implementation of integration is important. Both are delivery partners with the public sector and sources of experience and expertise that will add materially to the quality of the eventual outcome. I hope that the bill will make clear the role that the third and independent sectors will play in shaping the whole process. I believe that the integration of adult health and social care is an exciting and important policy that has the capacity to dramatically improve the way in which we provide adult health and social care. It has the potential to deliver meaningful preventative measures and to support older people and those with complex or multiple conditions to live well in their own homes. Although I accept that there will be challenges ahead in delivering such an ambitious agenda, I believe that working together locally, nationally, professionally and politically will enable us to improve the health and wellbeing of our nation and will help us to tackle the health inequalities that exist in our local communities. I support Alex Neil’s Government motion.

Will the minister expand on what the Food Standards Agency in Scotland and the Scottish Government have learned from the recent food scandal?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this debate as the European Union reporter for the Health and Sport Committee and having previously been the EU reporter for the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee and, before that, for the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. The specific EU legislative and policy issues that the Health and Sport Committee is prioritising are: the e-health action plan 2012-13; the European innovation partnership on active and healthy ageing; revision of the tobacco products directive; and the package on innovation in health through medical devices. Each of those policy areas is of key strategic importance for improving Scotland’s health and wellbeing. Moreover, they accord closely to the domestic priorities and associated policy reforms set out by the Scottish Government. There is no doubt that e-health is radically changing the way in which healthcare is delivered. It has huge untapped further potential and can significantly improve the quality of healthcare by adopting a person-centred delivery system. It provides technologies that will allow patients to be more in control of their own care than at present, which paves the way not only for better healthcare but for a more financially sustainable model of healthcare. Scotland is already recognised as being at the forefront of developments in that area. Innovations in telehealth and telecare that are taking place in Scotland are seen as being among leading examples of the application of technology to the delivery of healthcare in Europe. In making those innovations, we are promoting further the economic spin-offs that are available from the approach. For example, Highlands and Islands Enterprise has made digital health and care one of the cornerstones of its strategy for assisting the growth of the life sciences business in its region. E-health is not only good for patients, but will enhance the sustainability of health delivery and help to develop and support the crucial high-technology segments of our economy. Active and healthy ageing is another EU priority area in which Scotland has significant potential to contribute to—and, indeed, lead on—EU initiatives. The Health and Sport Committee will consider the European innovation partnership on active and healthy ageing, which is designed better to allow EU citizens to lead healthy, active and independent lives while ageing. There is already Scottish representation on the partnership, and the committee is interested in considering ways in which Scotland may make further contributions to its work. A particular example is the proposal to examine opportunities for Scotland to be at the heart of a knowledge innovation community through the European Institute of Innovation and Technology, which is financed from the EU horizon 2020 programme and is specifically considering healthy living and active ageing. The University of Edinburgh is currently developing proposals to participate in the prospective programme as an innovation hub—that is, a centre of excellence that integrates higher education, research and business activities. The priority actions that are set out in the Commission’s work programme offer significant opportunities for Scotland’s research and innovation communities. Indeed, those opportunities have the potential to propel Scotland to the forefront of a range of key initiatives in e-health and in active and healthy ageing. Not only will benefits accrue to the general public in the form of a person-focused healthcare system, but we will make healthcare more sustainable and, with appropriate measures introduced to facilitate active and healthy ageing, we will make a significant contribution to reducing the long-term demand for public services in health and social care. I will take forward the Health and Sport Committee’s EU priorities. In doing so, I support the motion that is before us. However, it would be remiss of me not to remind the Parliament that the greatest threat to Scotland’s position in Europe is remaining part of a UK that is sleepwalking out of the EU. Of course, the only way that we can safeguard Scotland’s EU membership is through a yes vote in next year’s independence referendum.

One clear aspect that has come out of the Audit Scotland report is that the patient administration IT infrastructure was not robust enough when the audit was carried out. For example, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde had 11 different IT systems. What progress has been made in upgrading IT systems to meet the required standard?

I welcome the opportunity to debate a very serious and sensitive issue, particularly as a member of the Health and Sport Committee, as the issue forms part of our current work plan. I welcome the Scottish Government’s £21 million rare conditions medicines fund, which is a response to the interim recommendations from Professor Charles Swainson, who is leading the review of the individual patient treatment request system. I hope that that review, along with the work that Professor Philip Routledge and Professor Bill Scott are doing on the new medicines approval process of the SMC and the implementation of SMC advice by health boards, will help to improve access to medicines in Scotland and ensure that the system is as flexible and responsive as it can and should be. The review is on-going, of course, and we await the final report to the Government in the spring. I note the cabinet secretary’s undertaking to take forward the recommendations. The Government therefore is listening and has listened to the concerns that have been raised by some of our clinicians and patients on access to new medicines. As the Conservative Party’s motion also refers to the need “to promote Scotland as a centre for medical innovation and research”, I want to reflect on the Scottish Government’s efforts in that area. If we consider, for example, its statement of intent for innovation in health, which was launched last June, we will see that it is clear that it is promoting innovation and excellence through the NHS, including new medicines, and that that is very much linked to biosciences and the employment and sustainable growth that we all hope that that sector will continue to generate. There are projects such as the Edinburgh BioQuarter and the partnership between BioCity Scotland at Newhouse in Lanarkshire and the University of Dundee, which has attracted the biggest-ever investment of its kind in Scotland. European investment of £100 million for a drug discovery project suggests to me that Scotland’s life sciences sector, supported as it is by our world-class universities and their research capability, has every opportunity to grow and flourish. I also want to touch on the issue of the cancer drugs fund. I recognise of course that it is a very sensitive matter and one that confronts policy makers and the medical profession in all publicly funded health systems. The difficulty in accepting the principle of a special fund for cancer drugs is that we as policy makers implicitly assert that cancer is somehow more significant than other serious long-term or life-threatening conditions. I do not believe that that is our task or that by so doing we would serve the wider interests of all those who rely on our national health service.

I speak as somebody who has worn both hats: one as a policy maker and one as a cancer victim and survivor. I am therefore acutely aware of how cancer sufferers and their families feel. However, what I want to do is help prevent people from getting to the stage where they need cancer drugs. That is why the Scottish Government’s £30 million for the detect cancer early programme is so important. The Scottish Government is taking the issue of access to new medicines extremely seriously and is reviewing the processes involved in a detailed and comprehensive manner. Ministers have already indicated and demonstrated their willingness to act on interim recommendations and allocate significant funding. All of us in the chamber are extremely concerned that people with the clinical need to access new medicines can and should do so. The Scottish Government is no less committed to achieving that aim and it will do so while protecting the fundamental principles of universal provision that underlie our NHS. I support the Government’s amendment.

Given that it is of course the responsibility of NHS boards to plan and deliver clinical services taking into account local demands, demographic changes and other relevant local issues, will the cabinet secretary clarify again the number of consultants specialising in paediatrics who are currently employed by the NHS and how that compares with the number employed when the Scottish National Party first came to office in 2007?

6. To ask the First Minister what progress the Scottish Government has made on tackling hospital-acquired infections. (S4F-01180)

The progress in the past year is very welcome. The First Minister might recall that, in January last year, Jackie Baillie claimed that Scotland was the supposed “superbug capital of Europe”. However, she failed to notice that her statistic related to 2005-06, when Labour was in office. Will he tell me what progress has been made since 2005-06 to reduce MRSA cases?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that, in England, many local GP services are being contracted out to private providers such as Virgin Care or Circle and that there are accusations that that has led to poorer access to services. Will the cabinet secretary confirm that national health service services will remain in public hands in Scotland?

I welcome the chance to participate in this afternoon’s debate and support a budget that is focused on jobs and growth and that makes the right decisions in very difficult economic times. I begin by congratulating the finance secretary on producing a budget that demonstrates this Government’s steadfast commitment to protecting the national health service even in these difficult times, and in the face of the changes to the wider welfare system that are being imposed on Scotland by a Tory-led Government at Westminster. They are certain to increase inequality in our society, including in health, and damage the lives of the poorest and most vulnerable in our society. In the budget, the Scottish Government honours its pledge to protect health spending for the whole of the current spending review period. Health boards will receive above-inflation increases in funding in the next two financial years, just as they have done in the previous two, while NHS workers will benefit from the lifting of the public sector pay freeze, with a 1 per cent increase for the lowest paid in 2013-14. The Government is keeping its promise to pass on the full Barnett consequentials for health. By 2014-15, the resource budget for health will be more than £1 billion higher than it was in 2011. Over the next four years, £390 million will be invested in improving NHS buildings and equipment, and the finance secretary announced last June that an additional £10 million will be allocated for additional maintenance spend in the next financial year, rising to £25 million the following year. The budget reflects the SNP Government’s commitment to increasing and investing in preventative actions and early intervention—a commitment that will not only improve the quality of life for many Scots, but reduce the long-term demands that are placed on our NHS. The budget will allow the NHS to continue to deliver the detect cancer early initiative for early detection of breast, bowel and lung cancer. It continues the £80 million change fund to support the integration of adult health and social care, which is crucial to our achieving better and more sustainable public services in the longer term. It will allow the early years collaborative to deliver on the priorities of the early years task force. It will deliver the family nurse partnership programme to first-time parents under the age of 19, and it will make further investment in dementia services. Members will also be aware of other announcements that have been made since the budget statement, including the additional £1 million for recruiting more accident and emergency consultants to back up our A and E action plan. This is a budget for the better health of the people of Scotland now and in the future. Investment in capital projects continues despite Westminster’s 26 per cent cut in Scotland’s capital budget, a cut that is forecast to reach 33 per cent in real terms by 2014-15. From major projects such as Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary in my region to smaller ones such as a new health centre in Dalbeattie, which has been 10 years in the making but is absolutely vital to the people who have waited for it, this Government is continuing to invest in modern facilities that are equal to the clinical challenges of the future. Such activity creates jobs, boosts the economy and helps economic recovery. Prioritising our NHS, as successive SNP Governments have done, is paying real dividends for the ill and infirm in our society. Hospital-acquired infection rates have fallen by more than a third and, since 2007, premature mortality rates have fallen by 6 per cent for cancer, by 27 per cent for coronary heart disease and by 19 per cent for deaths from stroke. Of course, those results are testament to the magnificent work done day in, day out by our NHS staff. As a member of the Parliament’s Health and Sport Committee, I make no apologies for fully endorsing a budget that is not only designed to protect Scotland’s NHS from Westminster cuts and the cuts that we know the Labour Party here would impose if it were ever returned to Government in Scotland, but goes much further than that and continues this Government’s pledge to invest in our NHS’s future and, in doing so, to invest in and improve the lives of future generations of our citizens. In health, as in all other aspects of this budget, the SNP Government is once again renewing and reinvigorating the social contract that we struck with the people of Scotland when we came to power in 2007, at the heart of which is an unwavering commitment to social justice—including, I might add, an unwavering commitment to a social wage, part of which includes the universal service provision that has now been abandoned by the Scottish Labour Party. With this budget, the finance secretary is continuing the journey to deliver a better and more sustainable NHS on which the SNP Government embarked in 2007. However, the stark reality is that the journey cannot be completed until and unless our Government has the full range of powers over the provision of care and welfare that only independence will bring. In 2014 the people of Scotland will have the opportunity to allow us to complete that journey by voting yes. It is an opportunity that I believe they will take. In the meantime, I urge Opposition colleagues across the chamber to support the Government’s budget for jobs and growth this afternoon.

I congratulate Joan McAlpine on securing this debate on an issue that is of importance and concern to constituents in the Borders and Dumfries and Galloway. I am pleased that the Parliament is pursuing the issue, given the number of constituents who have been in touch with us to talk about their on-going concerns about the poor coverage that they continue to receive. Members will recall the debate on the subject in October 2011. The concerns that members expressed then have not gone away, but they have been collated, surveyed and assessed by Ofcom. Perhaps now that the regulator, the UK Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, Maria Miller, and ITV have seen for themselves the level of dissatisfaction among the viewing public in the south of Scotland, rather than simply hearing that dissatisfaction expressed here, they will start to take a proper interest in improving the situation. Let us be clear: the situation needs to be improved. Respondents to the Essential Research study for Ofcom said that the ITV Tyne Tees and Border area is too large and that reporting is skewed towards the urban centres of the north-east of England. I therefore welcome Maria Miller’s recognition that the warnings that were given in 2009 and the concerns that we raised in 2011 were well founded. I am slightly encouraged by her request that ITV and Ofcom address the unmet demand for local news and Scottish programming in the south of Scotland. However, we still need to see action. There is a fundamental misunderstanding of the south of Scotland audience. The south of Scotland is a rich tapestry of distinctive communities, and ITV has an ideal market for a different and very local model of TV, if it is only bold enough to try it. If it chooses not to do that, the alternatives are increasingly clear. The Scottish Government favours a Scottish digital channel, which was a key recommendation of the Scottish Broadcasting Commission. That is also strongly supported by bodies that have worked hard on local TV for the south of Scotland, such as the south of Scotland alliance and the Scottish Local Television Federation. There are a number of hyperlocal TV channels, including Annandale TV in the south. When people do not like what they have, they will find ways of doing it themselves. Hyperlocal TV is hindered by broadband speeds and availability across a rural region but, as next generation broadband is rolled out with the assistance of the Scottish Government, those technical obstacles will fall. Ultimately, there is nothing to protect any commercial television company’s news provision from the same fate that has befallen print journalism through the growth of the internet; there is nothing except a willingness to change—to move away from large multiregional conglomerations that please nobody—and give viewers the content that they want, rather than what suits the company. As matters stand, people from Drummore to Eyemouth learn more in their local TV news about what happens in Carlisle and Gateshead than about their own areas. They hear much more about Carlisle City Council, instead of the decisions that their locally elected members take on vital services in the Borders and Dumfries and Galloway. Any mention of events that affect the region is fleeting at best. As my colleague Joan McAlpine said, both sides of the argument on Scotland’s independence referendum will lose out. Nowhere else in Scotland—and certainly nowhere else in Britain—would tolerate such a position. It is up to Ofcom, the UK culture secretary and ITV to come up with a better offer. I hope that that will be substantial, but it certainly cannot be more of the same.

The motion asks us to recognise the challenges that Scotland faces in tackling mental ill health. They are considerable. The minister mentioned some of the key statistics in his opening remarks. Mental ill health is estimated to affect more than a third of the population at any one time, and although Scotland’s suicide rate is improving, it is still slightly above the European average. There is also growing evidence of the role that environmental and social stressors play in mental health. For example, the Government’s strategy reflects on the comparatively high levels of mental illness that can be found in welfare benefit claimants. I worry—we should all be worried—about the impact that the new welfare reforms might have on those people. I certainly fear that the reforms will result in a further widening of income inequality across the United Kingdom. That matters. In 2010, The British Journal of Psychiatry carried an article by Kate Pickett and Richard Wilkinson that reported data that showed that a range of health and social problems, including mental health problems, are more common in more unequal societies. On Tuesday we heard about citizens advice bureaux funding suicide awareness courses for their advisers, and that is also highlighted in the strategy. If we recognise the continuing and developing challenges in this area of policy, however, we should also recognise the positive achievements to date. As I said earlier, Scotland’s suicide rate has decreased over the past decade. Although I agree that one suicide is one too many, I also think that an overall reduction of 17 per cent is noteworthy, although there is clearly some way to go to meet the 20 per cent target in the choose life strategy. In addition, I warmly welcome and have been delighted to support SAMH’s see me campaign. One of the key factors to securing meaningful long-term progress in delivering the mental health strategy is tackling the stigma that is, sadly, still associated with mental illness, since it can present a significant barrier to people accessing help when they need it. That point is also made in the article that I referred to. I therefore welcome the prominence that the new strategy gives to tackling that stigma and the Government’s commitment to working with SAMH and other partners to keep pushing that agenda forward. I also commend the strategy’s recognition of the early intervention agenda. We all know of the argument that good parenting has a material effect on adult mental health, whereas poor attachment in infancy can be linked to severe mental health issues in adult life. This is not simply an issue for our health service; it is one of the key messages that the late Campbell Christie urged us to recognise. Early intervention will be successful only if it is delivered at the local level with community planning partners in local authorities and other agencies. Local social work and education departments will have a strong role to play, as they do in Dumfries and Galloway, for example, where the incredible years parenting training that is referred to in the strategy is being made available to the parents of vulnerable three-year-olds. The inclusion of a commitment on social prescribing is also welcome. Although we should be clear that mental illness is no different from any other form of illness, and that, where medication is required, it should be prescribed, we should also investigate the possibility that there are other forms of therapy that may be effective. Preparing for last week’s debate on biodiversity, I read SAMH’s submission on the 2020 biodiversity targets. It reflects on the impact that physical activity can have on promoting good mental health and improving the quality of life of people who experience mental health problems and on the importance of natural environments as part of that therapeutic benefit. In the Stewartry, in the south of Scotland, which has a significantly higher than average elderly population, a social prescribing project that is joint-funded by NHS Dumfries and Galloway and the local authority is trying to reduce the level of antidepressant prescribing through other forms of therapeutic provision. I hope that the Government, as part of commitment 15 in the strategy, will have a look at what that project delivers and how it might link to the quality ambitions and core themes in the strategy. For my part, I hope that the project will be able to realise some of SAMH’s ambitions about the use of nature to help promote mental wellbeing. A further welcome inclusion in the Government’s strategy is consideration of the issues that relate specifically to veterans. I am aware, for example, that the First Base Agency in Dumfries raises around £10,000 a year to pay for two half days a week of psychological therapy for veterans who have come to the agency looking for help. Clearly, that is a valuable service that is being funded through third sector action, but there must be a better way of funding that provision. I would argue that the Ministry of Defence has a level of responsibility in this area. It can and should be making the modest funds available to support people who have served this country under its direction and who now suffer mental ill health as a result of their experiences. The mental health strategy represents a valuable opportunity to take stock of what has been done to date and also to include developing policy themes for the future. Fundamentally, however, it also represents this Government’s commitment to providing high-quality mental health services. It is, in the best sense of the phrase, a work in progress, and one which I am pleased to support. I support the motion in the name of Michael Matheson.

I, too, congratulate the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee for its motion on biodiversity. It is particularly appropriate that we are discussing biodiversity at the start of this year of natural Scotland. As other members have said, biodiversity is crucial. We face a challenge—not just internationally and nationally, but locally—in protecting biodiversity and reversing the continuing degradation of our ecosystems. Scotland has led from the front on climate change legislation and we have, too—in my opinion—an opportunity to take a lead in halting biodiversity loss. Globally, the UN is making renewed efforts to protect and restore biodiversity by 2020 through a 10-year plan, at the centre of which sit the so-called Aichi targets. The EU’s commitment in that regard is underlined by the EU 2020 biodiversity strategy, which sets six very clear targets and a framework for concrete action that is designed to reduce greatly by 2020 the threats to biodiversity in the EU. Of course, the work on an international scale will only be as good as the work on the local level, where more needs to be done. I would like to highlight just two things from the richly biodiverse region of Dumfries and Galloway in South Scotland, with which I am most familiar. I want to focus, in particular, on the Galloway and southern Ayrshire biosphere, which is now a UNESCO site and part of its man and the biosphere programme. It is the first in Scotland; it is the only site of its kind. As well as being huge—covering an area of 52,000km, or 7 per cent of the total land area of Scotland—it has a population of 95,000 people, an estimated 30,000 jobs within its area and more than 1 million visitors every year. In my view, the strength of the biosphere approach is in how it brings together all sorts of organisations—27 at the moment—to work collaboratively, and how it is laid out and designated. The biosphere has three zones: its central core, which is the area of prime conservation interest; a wider buffer zone, much of which falls within the Galloway forest park; and the outer transition zone, where most of the population live and work. That is crucial: it is not one big exclusion zone but a place where people co-exist with their environment and where people and nature both benefit from integrated land use. That is not just a concept. It is backed up with meaningful involvement of a wide range of stakeholders, from local fisheries trusts and SNH to the University of Glasgow and the Crichton carbon centre in Dumfries, with a vigorous emphasis on the importance of engagement and activity coming from the ground up rather than from the top down. The biosphere also connects with the apparently distant international drives towards protecting our biodiversity and relates them to work at local level—whether it be investigating carbon offsetting through woodland creation with the Crichton carbon centre or looking at sustainable approaches to drinking-water catchment management with Scottish Water. Although the biosphere received UNESCO recognition only a few months ago, its holistic approach to biodiversity is worthy of further consideration by the Government, particularly in terms of its potential to facilitate and encourage community-led, local sustainable development and conservation. I am also aware that the biosphere is seeking inclusion in national planning framework 3 as a national project. I ask the Government to look favourably upon its proposal. In addition to our red squirrels, which I am always keen to champion, Dumfries and Galloway has another great natural asset in the Solway Firth area, which is home to two European marine sites and a wide variety of diverse habitats, landscape and conservation designations. More than 130 fish species have been recorded in the Solway. There are commercially important king and queen scallop fisheries, and about 10 species of marine mammals including bottlenose dolphins and harbour porpoises have also been recorded. The Solway Firth Partnership works with fishing and conservation interests and in this, as with the biosphere, balance is everything. In keeping with the spirit of the biosphere is the view that the Solway Firth Partnership accepts the importance of biodiversity. That view is best expressed, in my opinion, by the partnership’s Pam Taylor, who said that to address biodiversity conservation successfully requires an understanding that everyone has something to gain from adequately protecting the environment. That statement gets to the heart of the matter. I have had time to highlight only two initiatives from a region that is packed full of energy and interest in protecting the natural environment—enough, indeed, for a debate in its own right. However, I hope that I have highlighted two approaches that I believe have great potential; that work should happen from the bottom up and come from as broad a base as possible; and that everyone has something to gain from protecting the environment. I welcome the committee’s focus on the issue and I look forward to the Government updating its current biodiversity strategy, which will help this country to play its part in halting biodiversity loss by 2020, working together with our European and international partners.

1. To ask the Scottish Government how value-based pricing will impact on the availability of orphan and ultra-orphan medicines such as Kalydeco. (S4T-00197)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that comprehensive response. In light of what he has just said, does he share my concerns that Kalydeco was offered at a higher cost in Scotland than it was in England? Can he give any insight into the impact of the higher cost on the decisions made by the Scottish Medicines Consortium?

Given that the cabinet secretary said that medicines pricing is currently reserved, can he explain the Scottish Government’s role in the development of a value-based pricing model for new medicines?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what consideration it is giving to the public health implications of the recently published Energy Action Scotland discussion paper, “The Relationship Between Fuel Poverty and Health”. (S4O-01669)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that detailed and comprehensive response. In its conclusions, the discussion paper highlights significant physical health benefits for very young children arising from tackling fuel poverty, especially in terms of infants’ weight gain and hospital admission rates, to give two examples. Will the cabinet secretary consider any further action that can be taken to ensure that the issue of fuel poverty and its health impacts on very young children are highlighted to health professionals such as health visitors and general practitioners and to family nurse partnerships, in order to continue to raise awareness and to help families that are affected by fuel poverty to access appropriate advice and assistance?

Will the cabinet secretary tell me how the Government works with NHS boards in monitoring and co-ordinating responses to mitigate the impact of the sort of event that we saw with the earlier-than-anticipated spike in the incidence of norovirus and seasonal flu?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement. Given that the chief executive of the NHS recently said that this year our health service has had its best ever performance, does the cabinet secretary share my conviction that our hard-working doctors, nurses and administrators will be more than up to the task of implementing the recommendations of the audit reports?

What funding is available for research to help protect against hospital-acquired infections, which will, I hope, offer benefits to patients in the longer term?

I too congratulate Alison McInnes on securing the debate and I welcome the members of the Camphill movement who are in the public gallery. I will focus my remarks on the Camphill movement’s contribution to the south of Scotland and on the community that I am most familiar with—Loch Arthur in Beeswing. Some members will recognise the name Loch Arthur from another context. As Alex Fergusson so rightly pointed out, last year Loch Arthur won the prestigious BBC food and farming award for best food producer and Loch Arthur cheese has won numerous other awards since 1991. I hope that members had the opportunity to sample Loch Arthur cheese—Alex Fergusson certainly did—at the lunchtime reception that celebrated the work of Camphill communities across Scotland. Given those awards, I make no apology for urging anyone who is visiting Galloway to drop in at Loch Arthur’s new farm shop and cafe, which opened at the end of November. That ambitious new development is an indication of Loch Arthur’s success as a social enterprise but it is also a fundamental part of the underlying philosophy of the Camphill movement. Loch Arthur is not a closed community but one that is very much part of, and contributes to the wellbeing of, the wider community that surrounds it. It is also a significant local employer, contributing meaningfully to a rural economy. Dave Mitchell from Loch Arthur speaks of that new development as not just a response to customer demand, but a means by which the public can have an encounter with the Loch Arthur community. It is a means of introducing people to the Camphill movement’s wider aims through the excellent produce and beautiful surroundings that the Loch Arthur community has created. I do not want members to think therefore that I am interested in only the social enterprise aspects of Loch Arthur or in the food that it produces—although I assure members that it is extremely delicious. Loch Arthur’s primary purpose, after all, is to care for adults with varying support needs. There is a great deal of relevance in the model of supported living that the Camphill movement espouses. More than 70 people live at Loch Arthur in nine houses, as Alex Fergusson said. Of those 70 people, 28 have disabilities and live in supported tenancies. The community revolves around the importance of the home life that they create in their shared households and the importance of people of all abilities having meaningful work to do and being empowered to contribute to the wellbeing of the community as a whole. In a sense, the success of the social enterprise and the community’s core aims are indivisible. The Camphill movement’s emphasis on respect, the value of the individual irrespective of their abilities or care needs, the importance of sustainability and the nurturing power of a caring community enrich Scotland. Loch Arthur’s successful social enterprise links the aims and objectives of its community to the wider community as a whole. The success of its excellent produce validates Loch Arthur’s ethos of work in which everyone can participate, whatever their ability. The Camphill movement has grown and flourished over a 70-year history in this country. I join other members in whole-heartedly wishing Loch Arthur and all of the Camphill movement’s Scottish communities every success for the future. I pay tribute to the dedication and commitment of the staff and the volunteers and all the valuable work that they do.

I offer my sincere thanks to all the NHS staff who were responsible for delivering what the NHS’s chief executive described in his recently published annual report as NHS Scotland’s “best ever performance” in key areas last year. The chief executive noted that waiting times are at their lowest ever level, patient care is safer, levels of premature mortality have reduced, and patients continue to rate the care that our NHS staff provide very positively. We are not resting on our laurels but, despite what Labour would have us believe, the NHS delivery of patient care in Scotland is overwhelmingly a good-news story. The progress that the SNP Government has made since 2007 has been striking on all the key measures. Waiting times have been reduced through the delivery of the 18-week referral-to-treatment waiting time target. There are more qualified nurses and midwives than when the SNP came into office, and Scotland has more qualified nurses and midwives per 1,000 people than is the case anywhere else in these islands. The Government has protected the front-line NHS budget, which will continue to rise in real terms despite the substantial cuts to the Scottish budget that have been imposed from Westminster, and it has realised more than £1 billion of efficiency savings between 2008-09 and 2011-12 to be reinvested to boost front-line care for patients. The SNP Government has made a commitment to no compulsory redundancies in the Scottish NHS—there is no such commitment in England—while taking action to ensure that our hospitals and communities have the right number and mix of available nursing staff. Despite the challenges that our NHS faces, that is a good record, which testifies to the Government’s commitment to ensure that our public has access to the best possible universal health service, which is free at the point of need. NHS staff have worked tirelessly to deliver those important outcomes. The protection of Scotland’s national health service and its staff against the unprecedented cuts in public spending that the United Kingdom coalition Government has imposed is a central element of the social contract that the Government has made with the people of Scotland. It is worth stressing that only the SNP was prepared to commit to protecting NHS funding ahead of the most recent election. In government, the SNP has honoured that commitment, and the Auditor General for Scotland has been able to conclude that the overall financial performance of the NHS remains strong. My concern is not about the commitment of NHS staff to delivering the best possible care for our citizens or about the Government’s commitment to protecting NHS funding. My concern is about the policies on the NHS that other parties in the chamber are advocating—and nowhere more so than in the case of universal benefits. We on the SNP benches are committed to keeping prescriptions free and maintaining free eye tests. Both are central aspects of the care that we offer the citizens of Scotland, and both contribute to the social justice that lies at the core of our approach to government. More important, both promote the long-term health and welfare of our citizens and, in so doing, they reduce the future costs to our health service. That is what Campbell Christie asked us to do and that is what we are doing.

It has become clear in recent weeks that the SNP Government stands alone in giving those undertakings. We know that no area of universal entitlement to public health provision is safe from Labour’s cuts commission, and we know that Labour’s view is common to the Tories and the Liberals. I conclude with a quote from a paper published yesterday by the Jimmy Reid Foundation, which was written by a team that includes two internationally respected experts in public policy, Professor Mike Danson and Paul Spicker. In the paper, the authors state that those who argue against universalism—one has to count the Scottish Labour Party among their number—are guilty of a serious lack of analysis of the consequences of their policies. On the system that is being championed by Labour and others, they conclude: “A divisive, economically inefficient system which increases inequality, reduces the quality of social services, stigmatises and damages the wellbeing of the poor but benefits large corporations is being advocated without any coherent evidence-based case being made.”

In conclusion, I support the amendment in Alex Neil’s name.

I, too, congratulate Claudia Beamish on securing the debate. I welcome the degree of cross-party consensus that has been shown on the issue and the willingness of members across the chamber to work together to resolve it. In my opinion, partnership working is the solution to the situation that we are discussing. I thank the cabinet secretary for meeting South Scotland members the other week and for writing to the board of NMS to make it aware of our concerns and of the partnership approach that has been called for by the delegation from Dumfries and Galloway Council and the local chamber of commerce, which met NMS recently. As members have said, Shambellie is important as part of the national collections and as a visitor attraction in Dumfries and Galloway in its own right. We all understand the financial pressures that are affecting every public body, but it is precisely these hard times that make the partnership approach essential. We need to look at why Shambellie is so little known, what more it could offer and how it could be promoted. If we can help Shambellie to survive in hard times, it will surely thrive and flourish as our economy strengthens and returns to growth. As a region, Dumfries and Galloway is accustomed to enticing people to make the relatively lengthy journey to see what it has to offer. The region also has experience of holding seasonal exhibitions that are of national significance, such as the justly praised Monet exhibition that was held in Kirkcudbright in July and August of 2005. That exhibition attracted 60,000 visitors in two months, which is four times the number of visitors that Shambellie attracted in its entire season last year. With the right material and support, Dumfries and Galloway Council and an organising committee of volunteers pulled off an exhibition of major significance that exceeded everyone’s expectations. Moreover, Kirkcudbright has hosted high-profile exhibitions every year since 2000, and the local organising committee—Kirkcudbright 2000—has had the support of the National Galleries of Scotland in doing so. In particular, Kirkcudbright has hosted successful exhibitions covering the work of the Glasgow girls and the Glasgow boys, many of whom had links with the town and drew inspiration from it and its surroundings. There is no doubt in my mind that Dumfries and Galloway can deliver. The Kirkcudbright experience demonstrates that Dumfries and Galloway has the capacity to succeed at such enterprises, which is why I support the efforts of Dumfries and Galloway Council, the local chamber of commerce, the Association of Dumfries and Galloway Accommodation Providers and Destination Dumfries and Galloway to work with NMS and find a suitable future for Shambellie. I believe that we can boost Shambellie’s profile locally and nationally, thereby increasing visitor numbers and income. We could use Shambellie for many of NMS’s loan and visiting exhibition activities in the region, as well as maintaining its role as Scotland’s national museum of costume. We could also use it as a venue for events, in the same way that other national museums are used. What is required is the innovation and drive that people in Dumfries and Galloway might like to wear lightly, but which resulted in those 60,000 visitors to Kirkcudbright town hall over two months in 2005. For that to happen, however, the NMS needs to get round the table with Dumfries and Galloway Council and the other local bodies to which I referred, and to work to take forward that vision and make it reality. NMS has a serious offer from local players who genuinely want to help, even though their own budgets are under real pressure. Not only that, they are local players that have a track record in overcoming distance and obscurity to net visitor numbers that anyone could envy. I also wrote recently to the cabinet secretary about the ownership issue of Shambellie house. In her reply, the cabinet secretary stated that the house comes under the property of Scottish ministers and that, should the NMS decide to close the museum, it will become the responsibility of the Scottish Government to maintain it and keep it secure. Although the decision on Shambellie is for the trustees of National Museums Scotland to make, I hope that they are willing to enter into real partnership working in Dumfries and Galloway and to give us time to consider the options, not just to save Shambellie, but to enhance and improve it for the future.

I am pleased and genuinely proud to speak in support of the Scottish Government’s motion on universal benefits. First and foremost, I am proud because the motion underlines the absolute determination of Scotland’s SNP Government to continue to protect the interests of the most vulnerable and disadvantaged in our society during these tough economic times. It is precisely during these extremely difficult times that the people of Scotland need to be confident that their Government is working for them—in so far as the devolution set-up allows it to do so—by delivering policies that protect the vulnerable and promote the social justice agenda in Scotland. Let there be no doubt that that social justice agenda is under attack from our political opponents in the Parliament, whose targets are the range of universal benefits that the Parliament has supported from the earliest days of devolution: free prescriptions, free eye examinations, free personal and nursing care and concessionary travel. The universal benefits that the Scottish Government will continue to deliver despite the attacks are not only measures to deliver social justice and promote social inclusion; they also contribute massively to reducing the long-term costs of health and social care that would otherwise arise. One of the four principles that the late and much-missed Campbell Christie’s commission endorsed in its report, produced in June 2011, was to prioritise expenditure on public services that prevent negative outcomes from arising. Measures such as free eye examinations, free prescriptions and free personal care each make a vital contribution to the preventative agenda that the Christie commission endorsed and which the Government is committed to implementing.

Let me develop this point. The abolition of prescription charges is one of the key policies that the SNP Government introduced in 2007. In a parliamentary answer that I received yesterday, Alex Neil confirmed that, prior to the SNP abolishing prescription charges in April 2011, long-term conditions—including Parkinson’s disease, asthma, cancer, multiple sclerosis and HIV—did not entitle people to free prescriptions. Does the Scottish Labour Party think that the estimated 254,000 people who went to the doctor for asthma in 2010, the 4,162 HIV sufferers or the 145,746 people who were diagnosed with cancer between 2006 and 2010 are getting something for nothing?

No thanks. [Interruption.]

The proposal that Scotland should return to a regime of means testing to determine eligibility for those public services is totally unacceptable. Such a policy would have a disastrous impact on hundreds of thousands of ordinary Scots who are already experiencing immense financial hardship as the economy struggles to recover. It would deepen divisions in our society between the haves and the have-nots and would inevitably lead to growing resentment between those who were required to pay for services and those whose means fell beneath some arbitrary level. It would lead to the stigmatisation of the elderly, vulnerable and disadvantaged in our communities and would impose an utterly obscene health and welfare tax on all citizens of Scotland, including the hundreds of thousands who spent their working lives paying taxes so that they might enjoy a modest level of comfort in later life.

No thanks. Those people are not living in a something-for-nothing society. They have spent their lives building our society. Means testing would also add to costs. Administering means-tested systems would require new departments, civil servants and bureaucracies. It would create anomalies and confusion about entitlements. It would dissuade citizens from seeking early diagnosis of illness for fear of the costs that they would have to meet for medication. It would lead to a two-tier system of care, as those with higher incomes squeezed out those who were unable to self-finance their health and care needs as they got older. The Scottish Government has entered into a social contract with the people of Scotland, and the universal provision of the benefits that I have discussed is a central plank in that contract. However, social contracts cannot simply comprise fine words and good intentions. They must have substance at their core. For the Government, that substance is the universal provision of public services, by which it honours its commitment to social justice. Sadly, no other party in the Parliament can claim to uphold or deliver that commitment and no other party—particularly not the Scottish Labour Party—can be trusted with it. Over the next two years, the people of Scotland will reflect on their constitutional future. It is increasingly clear that the choice will be between, on the one hand, an independent Scotland armed with the economic powers that we need to create a society that has a commitment to social justice at its heart and, on the other hand, a Scotland that is harnessed to a London-based Tory or Labour Government that is determined to dismantle the welfare state north as well as south of the border as it chases the votes of a mythical middle England whose Government appears to have given up entirely on the principles of social justice and social inclusion. I believe that Scotland will choose independence over an increasingly impoverished political union. I also believe that Scotland will continue to choose the SNP over an absolutely impoverished Scottish Labour Party. I support the Government’s motion.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to improve the energy efficiency of the national health service estate. (S4O-01421)

I note with optimism the announcement of the NHS Scotland carbon reduction programme, which will release £4 million a year for investment in patient care in Scotland. Indeed, in that respect, I also highlight the announcement of the new Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary. Does the cabinet secretary agree that as this will be Scotland’s newest hospital we have a very real opportunity to make it the nation’s most carbon neutral?

It is depressingly predictable that the Labour Party has opted to move a motion on a subject on which the Scottish Government has already responded with two comprehensive statements to the Parliament. As was made clear in both those statements, the Scottish Government has chosen formally to seek legal advice now, because the Edinburgh agreement makes clear the context in which an independent Scotland will be established. That context matters, in that we now expect the former UK Government to wholly endorse the position that Scots vote for in 2014, including their right to remain part of the EU. Therefore, let there be no doubt that, under an SNP Government, an independent Scotland will take its place at the EU’s top table as a full and constructive member state, ready and willing to play its part in helping to tackle the major challenges that the EU collectively faces at an unprecedented juncture.

I will come to Mr Rennie later. No one takes seriously the proposition that the EU will try to expel Scotland following the 2014 referendum. There is simply no provision under EU law to do so. Put simply, Scottish citizens and their membership of the EU are protected by EU law, not threatened by it. In any event, why would anyone in the EU even contemplate such a move? Scotland has been inside the EU for 40 years. We already comply with all necessary EU legislation. We are a major market for exports and investment from the other EU member states, and thousands of nationals from the other 26 countries have settled in Scotland and contribute to our economy, as our nationals do in the economies of the other member states. Scotland has unparalleled renewable energy resources in the EU. Given the continuing nonsense that we have heard on the back of the hysteria and hysterics last week, it is time to put some facts on the record. We need to try to move the debate beyond the process and focus on the substantive issue of Scotland’s membership of the EU. Our universities are among the best in the world and our scientists contribute substantially to joint EU research projects. Are we supposed to take seriously the scaremongering claims that Scotland will be unwelcome in the EU? That is simply ludicrous. The SNP’s message is clear and unambiguous: Scotland’s future inside the EU is safe with this Government. However, can our opponents say the same? Can those on the Tory, Labour and Liberal Democrat benches give the same unambiguous promise to Scotland’s voters and to her businesses and workers, whose livelihoods depend on access to the EU internal market? I doubt it. All three political parties in Westminster are running scared of the right-wing rhetoric of the UK Independence Party, which many observers expect to win the 2014 European Parliament elections south of the border. Just last week, six Tory back benchers tabled a bill that, if passed, would result in the UK leaving the EU. It is perhaps appropriate that one of the six is called Mark Reckless—reckless by name, reckless by nature. However, getting the UK out of the EU is no longer a minority sport—quite the opposite. It seems to be quickly becoming the official policy of the Tory-Lib Dem coalition, with the Labour Party, as is its way nowadays, dutifully following on behind. It now seems certain that the Tory-Lib Dem coalition will bring to an end the UK’s participation in the European arrest warrant. As the Scottish police have made clear, that will make the process of law enforcement in our country much more difficult. In fact, the Tory-Lib Dem coalition is poised to ditch 130 measures on justice co-operation with our EU partners, the majority of which are practical matters of law enforcement. The SNP Government opposes that move. That change will not, however, bring an end to the demands from the Eurosceptic right. Under Westminster rule, Scotland’s future in the EU looks increasingly uncertain, as Cameron is unwilling to face down the Eurosceptics, while the Labour Opposition sits in the wings, waiting to see which way the wind is blowing. The influence of the UK Government in EU negotiations has reached an all-time low. Even our closest friends have given up in the face of British obstructionism and high-handed lecturing on the alleged failings of our partners. The Westminster Government is set to bring the UK out of the EU. I firmly believe that the majority of Scots want a future inside the EU. To them, I simply repeat the question that the First Minister asked earlier this year: do they want to be independent in Europe or isolated in Britain? Like him, I know what I would rather be. I turn to the amendment from the Liberal Democrats, which asks for assurances that an independent Scotland would not be required to join the euro. On that question, I invite Mr Rennie to consult two legal texts, both of which are easily read and neither of which requires interpretation. The first is article 140(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union—I have a copy here for Mr Rennie if he would like to have a look at it later. It requires that any member state that seeks to adopt the euro must pass five tests, one of which is that the state must have been in the European Union’s exchange rate mechanism for at least the previous two years. That is in the treaty and so enjoys the status of primary EU law. No one disputes that. Secondly, there are two Council decisions that govern the operation of the exchange-rate mechanism, one of which dates from 1997 and the second of which dates from 2006. Both state that membership of the ERM is voluntary. If we put those two statements together, it is crystal clear that, before a member state is eligible to join the eurozone, it must have its own currency and have voluntarily decided to join the ERM. If it does not do so, it is simply not eligible to join the euro and it obviously cannot be forced to do so. That is the approach that Sweden adopted in 1995 and to which it continues to adhere. It remains outside the euro. It is a great shame that the Labour Party chooses to tie up the Parliament’s valuable time on an issue that the Scottish Government has already fully addressed. The people of Scotland would prefer us to debate issues that really matter to them, such as the huge damage that the Tory-Lib Dem Welfare Reform Act 2012 is doing to our disadvantaged and vulnerable citizens. I urge the Parliament to vote against the Labour Party’s motion and support the amendment lodged by Nicola Sturgeon. [Applause.]

Does the Deputy First Minister agree that it is outrageous that unelected peers such as Lord Forsyth, who was of course rejected by the Scottish electorate, and Lord Cormack should seek to undermine Scotland’s referendum? Does she agree that it is right that the biggest decision that our country will make for many generations to come should be made here in Scotland, for the benefit of all who live and work here?

I, too, congratulate Linda Fabiani on securing the debate on an issue of which many members will have personal experience—either themselves or through family members, neighbours or friends. I pay tribute to the women and men who are diagnosed with breast cancer and to the doctors, nurses, carers, families and friends who support them through often traumatic experiences. The debate is all the more poignant for me because, as some members will know, my mum is currently undergoing treatment for breast cancer at Crosshouse hospital in Irvine. I thank members from across the chamber for their kind words of support over the past few months and I offer my encouragement to those who are here today who are similarly affected. My mum is doing fantastically well. I am certainly proud of her strength and courage and her determination to win her battle against cancer, as I did mine more than 20 years ago when I was 19. Had it not been for my mum’s support and that of the many doctors and nurses who got me through it at the Beatson cancer centre in Glasgow, I know that I would not be here today. I am sure that many of us are aware of the debate surrounding the Scottish Government’s current detect cancer early scheme and the advert featuring Elaine C Smith, which has made headlines not just in Scotland, but across the United Kingdom. To be honest, it is great news that people are aware of the campaign. If just a handful more women check for the symptoms that are detailed in the advert and appreciate that lumps are not the only signs of breast cancer, it will have been worth it. We can stand here and welcome the £30 million of funding for such programmes, but I believe that ensuring protection for our nation’s healthcare is more important than putting a monetary value on our national health service. Getting the right sort of educational message to people from a young age on how to check themselves and spot signs of breast cancer is vital to successful treatment. I believe that the Scottish Government is doing the right things in ensuring that waiting times for cancer patients are down and in highlighting how to detect cancer. We know that there is still more to do but, just a couple of weeks ago, we heard that, between April and June this year, 95.3 per cent of patients with suspected cancer started treatment within the target time of 62 days. When cancer care nurses are asked what they think is the most effective form of detection, they do not hesitate in saying that breast-screening programmes have been invaluable. Last month’s injection of £12 million to upgrade breast-screening equipment to digital equipment will therefore be welcomed by the health professionals who deal daily with cancer patients. It is not just the Government and NHS staff who contribute to cancer care. As Jackie Baillie said, many members will have dressed in our finest pink garments and donned interesting accessories for the Breast Cancer Campaign’s annual wear it pink day. Many members have hosted Macmillan Cancer Support’s big coffee mornings. Last week, I was delighted to have one in the office that I share with my colleague Joan McAlpine in Dumfries. We are familiar with the charity Cancer Research UK and we are here today because of my colleague Linda Fabiani’s motion, which highlights Breakthrough Breast Cancer’s touch, look, check campaign. However, there are many smaller local cancer support networks throughout Scotland, many of which become a lifeline for cancer patients when they undergo treatment and during their recovery period, as I know only too well. I publicly acknowledge those organisations and thank them for all their efforts on behalf of our constituents whom they support. This evening, we are offering words of gratitude, support and encouragement to breast cancer patients and to the people who assist them. However, that is not all we are doing: I like to think that we are, as parliamentarians, committing ourselves to ensuring that our NHS remains able to support all cancer patients, and that we are committing ourselves to an NHS that is free at the point of need and remains the mainstay of our public services, providing the best possible care and service. I wish all breast cancer campaigns the best of success in the efforts to raise awareness, and have no doubt that members from all sides of the chamber give their full backing to those campaigns.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what representations it has received from the European Commission regarding minimum unit pricing for alcohol.

My understanding is that, as minimum unit pricing is a public health measure to tackle the real problem that we face in Scotland from binge drinking and alcohol misuse, it is consistent with European Union law, provided that the measure is proportionate. Does the cabinet secretary consider that to be the case?

Does the cabinet secretary, like me, welcome the support that the Scottish Parliament’s groundbreaking alcohol and minimum pricing legislation has received from the EU-level charities, groups and organisations that are concerned about alcohol abuse, such as the European public health alliance? Will he therefore continue to press the case for minimum pricing because it is the right and responsible thing to do if we want to improve the public health of the people of this country and reduce the social harm that is caused by alcohol misuse?

I congratulate Alex Neil on his new role as Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and wish him well in taking on the portfolio. I know that, whatever colleagues in the Labour Party might say, the portfolio will receive his full and undivided attention and commitment, as it did his predecessor’s. As a new member of the Health and Sport Committee, I look forward to working constructively with colleagues from across the Parliament, particularly Jackie Baillie, Drew Smith, Jackson Carlaw and Nanette Milne. I hope that there will be occasions on which we will find common ground in the interests of the NHS and the country. I cannot let the opportunity pass without paying tribute to Nicola Sturgeon, the longest-serving health secretary of any Scottish Executive or Government and, without question, the most successful. Nicola Sturgeon left the NHS portfolio with a reputation for absolute competence and trustworthiness, and members from across the Parliament recognise that our NHS was in safe hands. That safe stewardship has generated a substantial track record. Accident and emergency departments have been saved; prescription charges have been abolished; and there has been investment in new infrastructure, including at the Southern General in Glasgow and the new Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary. Waiting times are low and hospital-acquired infections are at an all-time low. All that achievement is set against increasingly draconian financial circumstances over which the Scottish Government has no control. Of course, none of that would have been possible without the dedication and professionalism of NHS staff. The praise for them is, to be frank, the only part of the Labour Party’s motion that I support. Anyone would be proud of that track record. To repeat what the minister said, in 2014-15, there will be a record £11.6 billion in resource funding for health in Scotland, which is £826 million more than in 2011-12. I contrast the situation in Scotland with that in England and Wales. We are only too well aware of the ideological dismantling of the NHS in England by the Conservatives and Lib Dems, but is anyone aware that Labour-governed Wales will cut health spending by 8.1 per cent in real terms in the next financial year?

If I thought for one second that the Labour Party had anything positive or constructive to say in this debate, I would gladly take an intervention from Jackie Baillie but, given the constant negativity and scaremongering from the Labour benches, I do not see the point of taking an intervention, not least because I know that Scotland’s health service and staff deserve better from their elected representatives. The Government’s amendment refers to “safe, sustainable and person-centred patient care”. The integration of adult health and social care presents a significant opportunity to help us to achieve that. Having social services and our NHS working together in true collaboration, with their efforts concentrated on the needs of the individual, is a worthwhile prize. One way in which we can meet the challenges of future resource restrictions and increasing demand is by pooling our resources and working flexibly and collaboratively. In Dumfries and Galloway, the region with which I am most familiar as a South Scotland list MSP, the council and the NHS are working on a positive and constructive model for integration. They have chosen to focus on how to enable care workers and council staff to work most effectively in partnership with health professionals at all levels, while improving local accountability and scrutiny. There is a real willingness on the part of councils and the NHS to make that important reform work. Integration is one way in which we can protect the NHS and enable it to provide the best possible services for the future and continue the direction of travel that was set out by Nicola Sturgeon. It will, I have no doubt, be a key focus and priority for the Scottish Government. I support the Government’s amendment.

I, too, thank the minister for his statement. The “National Planning Framework 2 Monitoring Report 2012” states: “Growth in renewable energy capacity is providing benefits in relation to climate change mitigation, but at the same time, landscape trends suggest that onshore wind is having cumulative effects on the character of upland areas which may become increasingly significant in the coming years.” What consideration is the Scottish Government giving to that issue in drawing up the third national planning framework?

The cabinet secretary will recognise that Dumfries and Galloway occupies a strategic location for welcoming visitors—particularly those from Ireland and Northern Ireland—to the Commonwealth games through the Loch Ryan ports. What consideration has been given to ensuring that the Commonwealth games legacy extends to the far south-west of Scotland so that people there can also benefit from the opportunities that arise from the games?

18. To ask the Scottish Government whether the commission on the delivery of rural education has considered the issues regarding school transport and the current statutory limits for this. (S4O-01243)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the more rural an authority—I am talking about authorities such as Dumfries and Galloway Council—the more significant such issues are. Many parents in Dumfries and Galloway have asked me whether there cannot be a better solution than the uncertainty of grace-and-favour places. Will the cabinet secretary undertake to work with rural authorities to help them to find the best solutions to the problem?

Given the recognition, in a recent letter to the First Minister, by the UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon that Scotland is in an “excellent position” to provide global leadership on sustainable energy, does the minister agree that it would be much better if Scotland were a full member of the United Nations, which would allow us to make the case for international agreement directly, working in partnership with our partners across these islands, in Europe and internationally?

In light of the meeting of the European Council that is getting under way in Brussels right now, does the cabinet secretary agree that the United Kingdom Prime Minister should use it as an opportunity to commit his Government to a common EU growth strategy based on increasing capital investment and strengthening job creation across the UK, exactly in accordance with the policies that the Scottish Government has repeatedly urged him to initiate?

I thank the minister for his statement and welcome what he said, particularly about the recently announced reduced rail fare pilot scheme in Stranraer. What progress has been made to ensure that adequate community transport links are co-ordinated with national services to allow rail passengers who visit the south-west of Scotland to take advantage of the Stranraer reduced rail fare pilot scheme? How will that scheme be promoted nationally as well as to other potential similar schemes as part of our next franchise?

I, too, congratulate Liz Smith on securing the debate. It is wholly appropriate that we take the opportunity to congratulate our mountain rescue teams and volunteers across Scotland on the courageous and tireless commitment that they give to saving the lives of others and, more generally, to ensuring that the outdoors are safer for us all to enjoy. There is an understandable tendency to associate Scotland’s mountain rescue activities with locations north of the central belt but, of course, mountain rescue teams also exist across the south of Scotland. I take the opportunity to pay tribute to the Moffat and Galloway mountain rescue teams, which cover hundreds of square miles of the south of Scotland and often join forces to support one another in emergency situations. Galloway alone is home to more than 40 summits in excess of 2,000ft, which are referred to as Donalds. The highest peak in southern Scotland is the Merrick, at 2,766ft, and the area is also home to countless miles of hill and forest footpaths and cycle trails, whether it be the Cairnsmore of Fleet or along the cradle of Scotland’s independence, as it is known, which starts and ends at Bruce’s stone overlooking Loch Trool, or along the Rhinns of Kells. Since the Galloway mountain rescue team was formed in 1976 it has responded to more than 400 incidents—in all weather conditions, day and night—which have covered a wide range of emergency situations. Happily, the vast majority of the incidents are resolved successfully. One of the extraordinary aspects of our mountain rescue teams—one that is greatly cherished by those of us who enjoy outdoor pursuits—is that they seldom, if ever, publicly criticise individuals who have found themselves in difficulty, even when some criticism might be justified. That is why I am particularly pleased that Liz Smith’s motion calls on those of us who enjoy outdoor pursuits to be properly equipped when we take to the hills, to have a basic understanding of map reading, as well as of the conditions that we are likely to encounter, and to ensure that someone knows where we are going and when we are due to return. If we take more responsibility in those ways, we will not only reduce the chances that we will need to be rescued, but will greatly increase the chances of our own survival and the survival of others, should we find ourselves in difficulty. I urge those who seek to try the wonderful outdoor pursuits that Galloway has to offer to visit the hill safety page of the Galloway mountain rescue website before they set out. I urge them, while they are on that website, also to visit the fundraising pages. Funding is an issue that is of constant concern to the teams of volunteers who work tirelessly and selflessly in difficult conditions to ensure the safety of the public. When the Scottish Government increased its funding for mountain rescue teams last December, Deputy Chief Constable Andy Cowie, the mountain rescue lead for the Association of Chief Police Officers in Scotland, said: “there is no doubt that without the bravery and commitment of these volunteers, the police in Scotland would find it very difficult, if not impossible, to fill the gap that would be created.” The funding was also welcomed by Galloway mountain rescue team chairman Derek Hamilton, who said that the extra funding would assist the work that was being done to refit their new mobile control facility vehicle. However, it is not only Government that supports the activities of our mountain rescue services. As is the case elsewhere, the Galloway mountain rescue team enjoys considerable support from a range of local and national companies that generously assist with provision of essential clothing, communications and transport. The support of local communities and the general public is important, too. It is a genuine privilege to pay tribute today to our mountain rescue teams throughout the country. They are staffed by dedicated and courageous men and women of all ages and from every walk of life, who give their time and skills so that we, the general public, can enjoy our outdoor pursuits in comparative safety. I express my sincere gratitude to the scores of volunteers who give their time to local mountain rescue teams. They are an inspirational group of people, who deserve more than just our thanks. I am looking forward to spending at least part of my summer out and about in the Galloway hills, and to doing so safely. I support the motion.

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the options under review by the Scottish Court Service have raised concerns across Dumfries and Galloway recently. Attending court can be an intimidating experience, beset with unexplained delays. What consideration is the Scottish Court Service giving to improving and easing public participation in the court system?

14. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it is taking to support the economy in the south of Scotland. (S4O-01112)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the Scottish Agricultural College report, “Rural Scotland in Focus 2012”, which was published last week and highlights a number of serious issues concerning the long-term economic challenges that face many of our communities—our small towns, in particular. The cabinet secretary may also be aware that 83 per cent of employment in rural Scotland is in the private sector. Will he identify the measures that can be taken in rural communities, including Dumfries and Galloway, to ensure that private sector investment is maintained and increased in order to support those communities?

I also welcome the excellent interim report from the fuel poverty forum and congratulate it on the work that it is doing on behalf of the Government to alleviate fuel poverty in Scotland. What are the next steps towards introducing the area-based national retrofit programme? What assurances can the cabinet secretary give that delivery of the programme will efficiently target the needs of those who are affected?

I, too, congratulate Colin Keir on highlighting all the fantastic work that the Royal Highland Education Trust does, and on securing the debate. In March, I witnessed the trust’s work at first hand, when I accompanied some pupils from local primary schools from across Dumfries and Galloway, who were on an educational visit with the trust, to learn more about local farming and food production. I was delighted to see the engaging way that the trust has developed of teaching young people about sustainability, about where their food comes from and about the journey that it goes on. From farm to fork is the idea behind the food and farming event that I took part in, and the primary school pupils lapped up their day at Wallet Marts Castle Douglas Ltd’s auction market. At the end of the day, they even got to take part in a mock livestock auction, and they made a fine troop of auctioneers. The development of innovative ways of teaching our young people about rural life, the importance of knowing where their food comes from, and the processes that are involved is key to ensuring that, in the future, the food and drink industry is sufficiently sustainable, and not just in rural Scotland but in the country as a whole. The way in which RHET is doing that is exemplary, and I know that a number of schools around the country are keen to implement similar teaching practices. I also know that the trust is working hard in all areas of Scotland and that, in Dumfries and Galloway alone, it managed 37 farm visits and 159 classroom speakers in the most recent academic year. Dumfries and Galloway obviously has a close and important link with its rural community, and never has that link been stronger than it has been this year. The fact that Dumfries and Galloway holds the presidency of the Royal Highland Show in 2012 means that it has a fantastic opportunity to showcase what the region has to offer the country from its food larder. Last year, nearly 25,500 children from around Scotland visited the Royal Highland Show through the RHET children’s discovery centre, as Colin Keir mentioned. I am sure that the children who visit it this year will be impressed by the whole show, including Dumfries and Galloway’s contribution to it. Interestingly, information from the trust about this year’s discovery centre says that it offers “a range of fun, interactive and hands-on activities for children of all ages”. I certainly look forward to trying it out for myself when I am there the week after next. I will cite some more astounding figures on the trust’s work. In the 2010-11 academic year, it reached more than 70,000 children and it achieved a 20 per cent rise in the number of school farm visits across Scotland. That is a key indicator that schools are recognising the importance of rural communities in our society and are embracing the opportunities that are afforded them through the trust. Much has been put on the record about the importance to the economy, both local and national, of the agriculture and food and drink industries in Scotland. Scotland Food and Drink states that its mission is to grow the food and drink industry to £12.5 billion by 2017, and that its vision is to build Scotland’s international reputation “as ‘A Land of Food and Drink”. To achieve that ambitious but extremely achievable goal, education is vital. As the trust would say, that education needs to be provided to children of all ages. The possibilities for the future of food and drink in Scotland—and in Dumfries and Galloway, in particular—are exciting. Just this morning, we heard about a £1 billion investment by Diageo that will benefit many rural communities, and we can look forward to investment on a similar scale for the food industry. As the providers, suppliers and growers of some of the best produce in the world, we should encourage our young people to take pride in what their country has to offer in the sector. I support Colin Keir’s motion, and I congratulate the Royal Highland Education Trust on all the work that it is doing to enthuse, educate and inform people about rural Scotland. I also look forward to future visits with it in Dumfries and Galloway.

As a member of the European and External Relations Committee, I welcome the opportunity to speak in support of the Standards, Procedures and Public Appointments Committee’s motion to amend standing orders in order better to permit the Parliament to protect Scotland’s interests in the legislative procedures of the European Union. As is well known, the policy reach of EU legislation is extensive, and it continues to extend. Many of the EU’s directives and regulations impact either directly or indirectly on a wide range of policy issues that fall within the competence of this Parliament. It is therefore essential that we, as a Parliament, avail ourselves of every opportunity to scrutinise and, where appropriate, influence EU legislative proposals that affect Scotland’s strategic interests and impact on our legislative authority. The motion seeks to modify our standing orders to achieve that result. The context for the modification is the Parliament’s European strategy, which was agreed to in December 2010 and which sets out a new approach for early engagement and scrutiny of EU policy initiatives and legislative proposals by the Parliament and its committees. It is difficult to overstate the importance of early engagement and how it can make a real difference. For example, last Friday, the European and External Relations Committee brought together in this Parliament the Scottish Government, the UK Government, the European Commission, the European Parliament and key stakeholders from across Scotland’s university, research and business sectors to discuss Scotland’s response to the Commission’s proposed EU horizon 2020 programme for research and innovation. That afforded us the opportunity to contribute to the on-going debate in Brussels on the future of research funding across Europe. Early engagement by the Parliament is important to ensure that Scotland is able to take full advantage of the opportunities. The key triggers for reconsidering the way in which the Parliament handles EU business are the new provisions introduced by the 2009 Lisbon treaty that require the European Commission to strengthen the role that the principle of subsidiarity plays in determining the reach of EU law. The strengthened subsidiarity protocol is therefore important as a device to restrict the unnecessary acquisition of legislative competences at the EU level and to stem the flow of unjustified legislation from Brussels. I have made the point in the chamber before, and I make no apologies for repeating it today, that when the EU legislates in a particular area, it is not the powers of Governments that are reduced but the legislative powers of Parliaments, including this Parliament. For that reason, we must ensure that our parliamentary procedures for handling EU business are revised to allow our views on prospective EU legislation to be properly taken into account first by the Westminster Parliament and then in Brussels by both the Commission and our members of the European Parliament. Although the motion sets out the formal changes that are needed to allow us to play our part in subsidiarity procedure, I am delighted that many of the wider recommendations that were made in the European and External Relations Committee’s report of 2010 are being taken forward. For example, the establishment of the position of European reporter in each of our parliamentary committees has greatly improved the capacity of each committee to ensure that, collectively, the Parliament is aware of the impact of EU legislative proposals on specific subject areas suitably early. The amendments to the standing orders will help to strengthen the Parliament’s European engagement. Key negotiations are under way in Brussels on the EU budget, reforms to the common agricultural policy and common fisheries policy, state aid, financial services reform, EU structural funds and horizon 2020, and it is vital that the Parliament’s voice is heard in those discussions. That requires a more proactive approach from the Parliament.

I congratulate Dr Murray on securing the debate on a subject that concerns many of our constituents who live in Dumfries and Galloway. I also recognise that the debate is taking place in the long shadow of recent tragedies on the A75 and extend my deepest sympathy to all those affected by those events. It is important that we understand from the outset that the Scottish Government is committed to delivering on its promise to upgrade the 3.6km section of the A75 between Carrutherstown and Kinmount—the so-called Hardgrove to Kinmount improvement. No SNP member of this Parliament with responsibility for representing constituents in the south of Scotland, and no minister in the Scottish Government, is under any illusion that the improvement is needed as a matter of urgency. As soon as funds are available, this Government will commence that work. As Dr Murray knows, it is one of the shovel-ready projects that the Scottish Government is urging the Westminster Government to provide funding for but, as my colleague Joan McAlpine highlighted, that request regrettably continues to fall on the deaf ears of the Conservative-Liberal coalition Government. It is, of course, appropriate that we are addressing the subject with a renewed sense of urgency. However, it is worth noting that, as long ago as 2002, during the first mandate of this Parliament, my predecessor as SNP member for the South of Scotland, Alasdair Morgan, first began to lobby the then Labour-Liberal Executive to fund improvements to the A75, especially the Dunragit bypass in the west and this particular section of the A75 in the east.

I would like to make progress. On 19 November 2002, Mr Morgan was assured in a ministerial answer by Lewis Macdonald—as Elaine Murray pointed out—that work on both the Dunragit bypass and the Hardgrove to Kinmount realignment would commence in the autumn of 2006. As we know, neither promise was kept. In September 2006, Dr Murray herself asked the then Scottish Executive, not unreasonably, what was happening with the proposed upgrades and would, I am sure, have been less than happy with Tavish Scott—who was then the transport minister—when he responded that the earliest start date for both projects would be the fourth quarter of the financial year 2008-09. In May 2006 my colleague Maureen Watt elicited from the minister the frankly astonishing statistic that, between 2001 and the end of financial year 2004-05, less than £0.25 million had been spent on improvements to the A75. In the following financial year, the sum spent was even lower, at an estimated £200,000. That was at a time when the Scottish Executive budget was expanding dramatically. Although it offers no comfort to those affected by the recent tragedies, one cannot help but comment that it is a great pity that only now is the issue being addressed by the SNP Government with the urgency that it deserves. Of the two delayed A75 schemes in question, there is now a firm commitment and timetable for the Dunragit bypass. The transport minister said that both schemes would proceed at the earliest opportunity and, as far as the Dunragit bypass is concerned, the Government has been as good as its word. As Elaine Murray acknowledged, that scheme, plus the investment of millions of pounds in the A75 over the past five years, have happened at a time when our capital budget has been drastically reduced by 32 per cent. I do not regard the record of the SNP Government over the past five years, when significant funding has been made available for improvements to the A75, as being the end of the story and, self-evidently, neither does the Scottish Government. It is understandable that there are, for example, calls for bypasses around the communities of Springholm and Crocketford. In stressing the consequences for the Hardgrove to Kinmount improvement of the cuts in the Scottish Government’s capital budget, I am not offering excuses for inaction but am trying to provide reasons and answers to my constituents as to why the project—and similar projects elsewhere—have had to be postponed. As soon as funds become available, the Scottish Government will honour its commitments to the people of Dumfriesshire and implement these road improvements. None of my remarks can hope to provide comfort to the families of those who have lost loved ones in the tragic accidents along this stretch of the A75. However, I can say categorically that the Scottish Government will implement the needed improvements to the stretch of the A75 between Hardgrove and Kinmount as soon as it is financially possible to do so.

Few of us are under any illusion about the seriousness of the sovereign debt crisis that is affecting parts of the euro zone. There is a real prospect that Greece will leave the euro zone in the next few weeks and quite possibly default on its remaining debt. If that happens—although I note from public opinion polls that most Greeks want to avoid that outcome—the EU economy will enter uncharted territory. Many economists fear that a Greek exit will trigger a financial contagion effect that will focus on Spanish and, perhaps, Italian debt, undermine confidence and push up the cost of borrowing. That will almost certainly mean that those countries will require substantial buyout support from the EU and IMF to finance their public spending obligations and support their banking sectors. As the cabinet secretary said, Scotland will not be immune from the economic fallout should events in the euro zone unfold in that manner. Although reports suggest that the UK banking sector could withstand a default on the Greek debt that it holds, any further escalation of the crisis to involve other indebted countries would be a quite different matter. More than 45 per cent of Scotland’s exports are destined for EU markets, which currently provide one of the very few sources of additional demand for Scottish businesses. Therefore, it is of the utmost importance to us that every effort is made to ensure that the current euro zone crisis is not allowed to derail the slow recovery from what is the deepest and most protracted recession in living memory. It is clear from developments in the euro zone that austerity is not working. In both Greece and Spain, output has dropped dramatically, while unemployment—especially among the young—has reached historically unprecedented levels and is still rising. However, austerity is not only failing in the euro zone; it is failing here in the UK, where the economy has entered a double-dip recession for the first time since 1975.

Given that we have heard nothing positive from the Labour Party, I think that Mr Findlay would do well to listen to what I have to say. Against that backdrop, I welcome what appears to be at least the beginning of a change in approach from EU member states and institutions. Increasingly over the past few weeks, we can detect a shift in emphasis away from austerity to focus instead on how best to stimulate economic growth. It is not only the European Commission that is moving towards a growth agenda as a solution to the current crisis. The OECD, too, has encouraged the EU to shift its economic tack and adopt a growth compact, which would include interest rate cuts, infrastructure investments and, possibly, the issuing of euro bonds. Although it is premature to suggest that we are witnessing a decisive shift in policy on the part of euro zone countries towards a fully fledged growth strategy, it seems that the argument is being won by those such as the Scottish Government who have long argued that capital investment is an essential element in any set of proposals designed to restore economic growth to the European economies, including the UK. Without such a strategy, it seems to be inevitable that many EU member states, including the UK, will remain trapped in an austerity-induced recession. An EU-wide plan B, which is needed to restore confidence and bring much-needed growth to the European economies, is beginning to emerge. Although nobody expects overnight success, there is no doubt that the rebalancing of economic policies in favour of a growth agenda, rather than an austerity agenda, is an essential ingredient if the euro zone is to remain intact and recover from the current crisis. In that regard, I very much welcome the recent announcement that the EU will set aside €230 million in guarantees to support the issuing of project bonds to finance infrastructure projects. It is expected that those loans and guarantees, which will be provided under the EU budget and the European Investment Bank in the form of project bonds, will mobilise up to €4.6 billion in private investment. Project bonds are one of the mechanisms that the Commission will utilise in its €50 billion connecting Europe facility, which is designed to finance key infrastructure projects that are aimed at improving the EU’s strategic energy, transport and digital networks. I very much hope that EU project bonds will leverage new and much-needed infrastructure investment in transport, energy and digital network projects here in Scotland. I have noted the emerging consensus across the EU that, collectively, we must embark on an economic strategy that is designed to deliver economic growth and that a central element of such a strategy is capital investment in infrastructure projects. In that light, the UK Government’s continuing failure to respond positively to the Scottish Government’s calls for additional funds to allow us to invest in shovel-ready infrastructure projects is both inexplicable and utterly irresponsible. Indeed, it seems that, although the UK Government is prepared to encourage the euro zone along that route to resolve its immediate crisis, it is incapable of grasping the dire consequences of the austerity policies that it continues to impose here in Scotland. Moreover, it is ducking entirely its responsibility for supporting the growth strategy across the EU that is necessary if the current crisis is to be managed successfully—an outcome that is very much in the UK’s economic self-interest. If there is to be any charge of complacency, we should look no further than the UK Government, which has demonstrated nothing but complacency in its response to the effects of a possible euro zone collapse on the UK and Scottish economies. Who, last December, vetoed the euro zone country proposals to toughen the EU treaty to support the implementation of fiscal reforms in the heavily indebted euro zone countries? Which EU Government is now virtually isolated in its insistence that further doses of the austerity medicine alone will get us out of this double-dip recession? Which Government is proving the most resistant to implementing the reforms to the financial services sector that are necessary to ensure that the crisis of 2008 never happens again? Which Government has repeatedly refused to contribute to the euro zone firewall facility and even questions the need for more resources to be assigned to the IMF to enable interventions in support of the euro zone to be made? The answer to all those questions is that it is the UK Government that has not only spectacularly failed to recognize the potential calamitous effects of a euro zone collapse on the UK and Scottish economies but resisted offering even a modicum of tangible support to other EU member states that are experiencing the most severe economic crisis in living memory. I hope that the Parliament will give its overwhelming backing to the Scottish Government’s motion this evening.

It is a real privilege for me to debate this motion, which seeks the Parliament’s support to urge those who will attend the forthcoming Rio+20 conference to agree a programme of action that will make a serious and lasting contribution to tackling the pressing challenges that face global society, principally how to build a green economy, achieve sustainable development, lift people out of poverty and improve international co-ordination for sustainable development. I thank all the members who have signed my motion and those who will participate in this evening’s debate. I also congratulate CIFAL Scotland on bringing this issue to the Parliament and, as I have said in my motion, on its work “in bringing together the public and private sector to advance the green growth agenda in Scotland” and its ambition, shared with Sniffer, Scottish Business in the Community, the Scottish Wildlife Trust and Scottish Environment LINK, “to give Scotland a powerful voice in promoting greater sustainability worldwide”. Through the establishment of the Rio flourishing Scotland working group, those organisations came together to raise awareness of Rio+20 in Scotland and jointly produced “A Flourishing Scotland”, which not only celebrates Scotland’s progress since the first earth summit in 1992 but, importantly, highlights those areas in which greater ambition is required if Scotland is to maintain its momentum towards a sustainable future. Their efforts are to be commended. As colleagues will be aware, Rio+20 convenes 20 years after the earth summit in Rio, which led to the publication of the “Rio Declaration on Environment and Development”. In reflecting the emergence of a global consensus on and political commitment at the highest level to developmental and environmental co-operation to tackle poverty, promote environmental protection and achieve sustainable development through a global partnership under the auspices of the United Nations system, that document resonates as profoundly today as it did 20 years ago. There is no doubt that, 20 years later, some progress has been made. Few today deny the reality of climate change and no one is under any illusion that it is the world’s poorest who are most vulnerable to the destruction that continued environmental degradation will unleash. However, our collective response remains inadequate, as many Governments simply fail to implement the measures necessary to reverse global warming and rescue countless millions from the unacceptable costs of climate injustice. Today, the global economy faces its worst economic and social crisis in living memory and the inescapable truth is that yet again those who live in the world’s poorest countries will suffer most as inequalities in income, health, education and mortality widen even further. I therefore echo the remarks made in January by our First Minister when he urged world leaders to make 2012 a “year of climate justice” and the motion adopted by the Parliament in March, in which we endorsed the opportunity for Scotland to champion climate justice. If we are to achieve that, the Rio+20 talks must deliver. The conference is a historic opportunity for Governments, the UN, and other international agencies to provide the leadership that we will need if we are to deliver concrete policies that will promote prosperity and reduce poverty, advance social equity, and ensure environmental protection. I do not consider that to be an overly ambitious request. The Scottish Parliament has shown what can be done to bring sustainable development closer to the heart of decision making in Scotland. Today we are fully aware of the economic, environmental and social impact of the policies that we pursue to meet our objectives. As parliamentarians, most of us are involved with a range of stakeholders who are determined to support our efforts to mainstream those concerns into our legislative and policy thinking. That has led us to enact pioneering climate change legislation that incorporates world-leading emissions and renewables targets, along with commitments to climate adaptation and Scotland’s first land use strategy. Through our legislation, we have championed community involvement in renewable energy development. We have demonstrated that protecting the environment is desirable, and that it can be profitable for individuals and businesses alike. As the Parliament of and for the people of Scotland, we are encouraging our non-governmental organisations, businesses, local authorities, community groups, and research institutes to become part of a collective and collaborative effort to create a sustainable future and ensure employability. Last night, it was my privilege to host the flourishing Scotland reception, which brought together a wide and diverse cross-section of Scottish society, all linked by a common commitment to support actions that will lead to a more sustainable global future. It is not only appropriate policies that we need to implement if we are to succeed at the forthcoming Rio conference. Arguably the greatest challenge that will face Rio+20 is to establish an international framework that will ensure delivery of the policies that we need—an international framework for sustainable development. The absence of a robust and meaningful international framework represents the weakest link in the prospects for achieving success at the Rio+20 conference. I said at the outset that I wanted to congratulate CIFAL Scotland, Sniffer, Scottish Business in the Community, the Scottish Wildlife Trust and Scottish Environment LINK on the work that they do in raising awareness in Scotland about how important it is that the Rio+20 conference is a success in substance and its subsequent implementation. In closing, I stress that the matters that will be discussed next month in Rio do not involve faceless people in a faraway land. Those issues affect us all, and we all have a responsibility for the success of the conference. I am delighted that Stewart Stevenson will represent the Scottish Government and Parliament in Rio next month. Achieving a consensus around my motion will enable him to take to that meeting a strong and positive message from the people of Scotland. I am not suggesting that Scotland’s journey towards supporting sustainable development is over. Certainly, there is more to be done. Scotland needs a renewed focus on sustainable development that acknowledges its key role in achieving economic stability, environmental sustainability and social equality. In that regard, the Parliament has an important governance role to play in regularly reviewing and scrutinising the progress that is being made. More work needs to be done on identifying and exploring alternatives to gross domestic product, especially given the apparent disconnect between GDP and prosperity. What measure should we use to take account of Scotland’s values, attitudes and behaviours in relation to sustainable development? It is incumbent on us all to continue to work with the people of Scotland to that end. If ever there was a time when the interests of different peoples in different parts of the world could have been regarded as separate and unrelated, that time is long past. Today we live in an interconnected and integrated world in which our individual actions directly affect the welfare of people across the planet, just as their actions affect us. The Rio+20 conference will provide an opportunity to take a decisive step towards delivering sustainable development and climate justice at a global level that will benefit every citizen in every country across the world. I therefore hope that members of Parliament will give their unanimous backing to the motion and, by doing so, send a message to the delegates who will attend the Rio+20 conference that the people of Scotland urge them to a successful conclusion. We have the momentum; let us build on it and ensure that it does not end in Rio.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the finding in the Carnegie report that 76 per cent of people in Scotland feel that libraries are very important or essential for communities shows continued and strong support in Scotland for the public library service?

I, too, congratulate Alex Fergusson on securing the debate. I welcome some of the authors of the report to the gallery. I also congratulate Alex Fergusson on the hard work that he has done with the volunteers over his terms in Parliament. The Dumfries and Galloway third sector forum’s excellent report “A Road to Health” comes at an important juncture in Scotland’s policy-making process, coming as it does at a time when we as a Parliament recognise fully the importance of preventative measures and support for community actions in our ageing society. The report sets out very clearly the argument that the NHS and local authorities need to work together to maximise the effectiveness of transport for older patients in remote and rural areas. That is a sentiment that I could not agree with more and it is a priority that I hope local authorities across Scotland take on board. However, I am sure that everyone in the chamber will be prepared for the standard argument that prohibitive costs often make such transport options difficult. I fully appreciate that the costs of fuel, staffing and vehicle maintenance make many such ventures very expensive before they are even operational. However, I also believe that we have a duty to overcome those obstacles and find solutions with our colleagues in the NHS and local authorities so that we can provide the standard of transport that patients in rural areas need and deserve and which is crucial to the communities that we serve. I appreciate that every patient will have his or her individual experience of attending a medical appointment to recount and that all MSPs will receive various sorts of feedback. In addition to what Alex Fergusson has said, I will set out some of the challenges that face patients in rural areas, as reported by the community partnerships project volunteers. As Alex Fergusson rightly pointed out, 69 per cent of respondents to the report travel more than 10 miles for an appointment, with 14 per cent travelling between 50 and 100 miles. That is the equivalent of travelling from Edinburgh to Paisley and back, and is unacceptable. The report also points out that 16 per cent of respondents had appointments before 10 am and that 29 per cent said that they found travelling to and from appointments stressful or very stressful. That only adds to the anxiety of attending a medical appointment in the first place. As I said, we are always prepared to hear why solutions cannot be found. For that reason, I congratulate the Dumfries and Galloway third sector forum on including in its report ways in which we might overcome the challenge. The engagement with the forum of council officials who are leading the rural transport solutions initiative is extremely encouraging. I know that colleagues across the Highlands and Islands, Aberdeenshire and other rural areas face similar issues with rural patient transport, so I hope that what is happening in the south-west will give them hope that progress can be made. The way in which the RTS pilot was run in conjunction with Wigtownshire Community Transport, which provided transport for the adult resource centre in Stranraer, is exemplary. Having identified the exact needs of the scheme, an extremely effective system was put in place. Co-ordinating the use of the vehicles and scheduling pick-ups and drop-offs meant that activities could be maximised, the system was more cost effective and the quality of the service improved. As I said in the debate that was held in the chamber in March on Jim Hume’s motion, the report published by the Christie commission last year provides “a comprehensive statement of the principles that should inform our approach to community transport. In particular, transport services have to be designed around the needs of older and vulnerable people who live in our rural communities.”—[Official Report, 29 March 2012; c 8024.] I fully support the forum in its endeavours to have a co-ordinated approach and other good practice methods reproduced and adopted throughout Scotland. I congratulate all involved in the Dumfries and Galloway third sector forum on their efforts in pioneering a programme to be built up and made fit for purpose by other community transport initiatives. I am keen to ensure that all their hard work pays off. In that regard, I look forward to continuing to work with them and with colleagues across this chamber to support our older and vulnerable citizens.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how European Union project bonds could be used to support infrastructure investment in Scotland. (S4O-00972)

The European Commission and the European Investment Bank are looking to stimulate private capital for investment in key EU transport, energy and digital infrastructure through the immediate setting up of a pilot phase of a Europe 2020 project bond initiative for 2012-13, which could involve €230 million being invested in five to 10 large infrastructure projects. Does the cabinet secretary agree that that initiative provides an opportunity for us to proceed with the digital connectivity agenda, which is essential for unlocking the full growth potential of rural Scotland, particularly South Scotland, which I represent? Can he assure me that representations are being made to the EC and the EIB to push forward Scottish projects for inclusion in the pilot phase?

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement. Given that the European Commission has made clear that strengthening synergies and complementarities between the structural funds and the European Union’s research and innovation programme, horizon 2020, will be essential for the funding period 2014 to 2020, what progress is the Scottish Government making on developing a Scottish approach to the smart specialisation agenda?

3. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports research and development in the small and medium-sized enterprise sector in South Scotland. (S4O-00951)

Given the importance of research and development to the SME sector and the wider regional economy, does the minister agree that the further education colleges in the south-west of Scotland, as well as the research institutes and other education facilities at the Crichton campus, have a central role in supporting the research and development efforts of the SME sector? Does he agree that it is therefore important that the sector is fully engaged in preparing for and participating in the forthcoming European Union horizon 2020 programme, once an agreement is finally reached by the Council and the European Parliament?

I thank my fellow committee members and the clerks for their work on the report. As a relatively new member of the committee, I was not involved in the preparation of the report or the evidence sessions, but I am pleased that I will be involved in the committee’s future work in monitoring the implementation of Scotland’s 2012 homelessness commitment after this year’s deadline. As we consider the committee’s report into meeting the commitment to have all unintentionally homeless people settled by the end of this year, let us remember why the legislation was introduced in 2003. As we all know, homelessness can have a variety of causes, including, among many others, eviction, instances of domestic violence and abuse, and discharge from hospital or prison—and we should not forget people living in overcrowded or temporary accommodation. Recent figures from February show that 23,796 homeless applications were made between April and September 2011. Although I appreciate that the figure represents a 20 per cent decrease on the previous year, I am sure that we all agree that it presents a challenge for all local authorities. The committee’s report goes some way towards identifying where work can be improved but also where things are being done well. One obvious example of a positive impact being made is the implementation of the housing options approach, which Maureen Watt mentioned. I fully support the committee’s calls for that approach to be implemented consistently throughout Scotland. Few would take issue with the proposition that preventing homelessness in the first instance can play a major part in ensuring that some of the most vulnerable people in our communities do not fall victim to a range of other problems that are directly associated with homelessness. Evidence presented to the Christie commission also pointed to those connections. I would therefore go slightly further and suggest that membership of the hubs and the way in which they operate could be standardised to ensure consistency throughout Scotland and so that best practice is shared and rolled out across the country to maximise the results. I welcome the minister’s announcement today of £150,000 of on-going funding to support the hubs. Such partnership working was a key feature of the committee’s recommendations. Having met representatives of various housing associations in my own region, such as Dumfries and Galloway Housing Partnership, I am well aware of the benefits of good communication between the different agencies involved in dealing with homelessness cases. In fact, DGHP’s involvement at a strategic level with the council on homelessness policy is held in high regard as an example of positive and productive partnership working. I share the concerns that some witnesses raised about the potential implications of the UK Government’s welfare reforms for homelessness. It has been estimated that the number of people classed as priority homeless as a direct result of the Welfare Reform Act 2012 could reach 3,000. If that figure is accurate, Scotland’s local authorities have said that they will struggle to provide enough permanent homes and that there is a real challenge. Furthermore, the housing benefit changes with regard to underoccupancy have the potential to force people out of accommodation and increase homelessness, especially among the 25 to 35 age group. The changes will therefore impact on a group in society that is already highly vulnerable in employment terms as a result of the UK Government’s austerity policy. The figure of £100 million has been estimated as the cost to the economy of the changes and I am concerned about where that shortfall will be met from. Although it is clear that the Scottish Government is making good progress in working with local authorities and housing associations to meet the 2012 homelessness commitment and that the committee’s report contains many good ideas on how to produce even better results, we cannot ignore the significant challenges that are on the horizon as a direct consequence of the UK Government’s misguided policies. It is therefore imperative that parliamentarians, third sector agencies, housing associations, local government and national Government work together to ensure that the good work that is being done in Scotland to tackle homelessness is not blown off course by the ill-judged measures that are being legislated for by the London Government, which are directed against the interests of some of the most vulnerable people in Scotland. I support the motion.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to support further investment in the economic infrastructure of south-west Scotland. (S4O-00908)

I welcome the commitment that the Scottish Government has shown thus far to the regeneration of Dumfries and Galloway. How can we as parliamentarians encourage and support local businesses that want to get involved in regeneration and community empowerment projects in the area?

I congratulate Jim Hume on securing this debate, which is on an important issue, particularly to those of us who represent large rural areas. Members who have been kind enough to have offered me a lift from time to time will know that I largely rely on public transport to get around the south-west of Scotland. Therefore, the challenges in accessing public transport are not alien to me; I certainly have experience of them. I will refer mainly to work that is going in Dumfries and Galloway to develop the role of community transport in partnership with the local council. In Dumfries and Galloway, only around 15 per cent of bus services are commercially viable; the remainder rely on public subsidy in order to operate. I appreciate that maintaining those subsidised services is increasingly challenging and that high fuel costs are a significant problem in Dumfries and Galloway. The region has that in common with the rest of rural Scotland. The south west of Scotland transport partnership has its work cut out in trying to support operators that find that, even with a subsidy, many of the longer routes that have low passenger numbers may no longer be financially viable. When Swestrans commenced its recent retendering exercise, estimates suggested that between 30 and 50 per cent of the region might end up with no bus services. It is greatly to the credit of Swestrans that that situation has not come to pass, although the underlying economic trends have not disappeared. Dumfries and Galloway Council has been working with the third sector on a potential solution in developing a partnership approach that permits community transport operators to tender for timetabled services and provide local authority transport services, including for schools and social work services. An example of that innovative approach is the partnership between the council and Wigtownshire Community Transport. An approach has been developed that allows the community transport organisation to use the council’s bus fleet to undertake a school run in the morning, after which the organisation has bus use for other services for the rest of the day. It also has them during school holidays. The approach started as a trial that was supported by the European northern periphery programme, and there is now work being done towards its operating on a self-sustaining basis. An additional benefit is that Wigtownshire Community Transport now employs its own drivers, which generates employment and adds to its list of achievements. I am not suggesting that that precise model could or should be rolled out across the country, although the underlying principle has wide relevance, and nor am I arguing that the approach would solve all the complex transport challenges that rural Scotland faces. However, it shows that there are innovative partnerships and that there is joined-up thinking between our local councils and community transport providers. I also want to highlight the work that the Dumfries and Galloway third sector forum has done as part of the Parliament’s third community partnerships project. Its recently published report, which is entitled “A Road to Health”, identifies a number of issues that relate to the transport of older people to and from hospitals and clinical appointments, and underlines the extent to which adequate transport provision in remote and rural areas, such as south-west Scotland, is vital for the health and wellbeing of older citizens. I am grateful for the opportunity to highlight the good work that has been started in Dumfries and Galloway on improving community transport, although I certainly do not underestimate the challenges of meeting the wider transport needs of those who reside in our rural communities. I endorse Jim Hume’s remarks about transport in rural Scotland being a key element in supporting our older and vulnerable citizens. In that respect, the costs of doing so represent preventative spending in the terms that were elaborated in the Christie commission’s report, which was published last year. Indeed, we can find in that report a comprehensive statement of the principles that should inform our approach to community transport. In particular, transport services have to be designed around the needs of older and vulnerable people who live in our rural communities. The integrated approach that Dumfries and Galloway Council is promoting is an example of the Christie principles being put into action. It will result in real benefits and will give community transport in the region an even more prominent and integral role in the future as a partner that provides flexible and responsive transport that can fill in the gaps in provision of which we are all only too aware.

I welcome this afternoon’s debate as a member of the European and External Relations Committee and as a newly appointed EU reporter for the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, having previously been the EU reporter for the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. In accordance with the Parliament’s EU strategy and as EU reporter for the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, I want to report to Parliament the EU priority issues that that committee will engage on in the coming months. As is the case for all committees, the priorities for the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee were set out in the European and External Relations Committee’s first report, and are informed by the European Commission’s work programme for 2012, which was published last November. Before I go any further, I would like to thank Jamie Hepburn who, as my predecessor as EU reporter on the committee, took the lead role in identifying those priorities. The specific EU legislative and policy issues that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee is prioritising include the review of state aid guidelines for broadband networks; trans-European networks; the review of European public procurement rules; Europe’s digital agenda; the framework for future EU ports policy; and improving passenger rights across all modes of transport. I hope that colleagues will agree that the EU legislative and policy proposals in each of the areas that I have set out are of key strategic importance for growing Scotland’s economy by improving our infrastructure, and enabling our citizens and businesses to better access the EU’s internal market. Early engagement by the Parliament is important to ensure that Scotland is able to take full advantage of the opportunities arising from future EU investment programmes such as the trans-European transport networks—the TEN-T—and the connecting Europe facility, which is worth €40 billion, in particular. Linking the development of Scotland’s shipping and ports to the development of our road, rail and broadband infrastructure can only help to stimulate Scotland’s economic competitiveness and encourage greater tourism, export and business opportunities. However, those discussions are taking place against the backdrop of the most severe fiscal and economic crisis in living memory. The tough EU budget negotiations ahead will determine EU policies and spending for 2014 to 2020 and will undoubtedly result in a much reduced overall EU budget. Against that background, of particular importance for Scotland and related to the connecting Europe facility, are Commission proposals to use innovative financial instruments such as project bonds as one way to mobilise private capital, together with the European Investment Bank, for investment in large-scale energy, transport and broadband infrastructure projects. As colleagues will be aware, the EU legislative cycle from the initial Commission proposal to agreement on the final legislative instrument often takes years rather than months. The Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s EU priorities that I have reported relate to measures at varying stages in that legislative cycle, and that will doubtless inform the manner in which the committee will undertake its work. As a first stage in that process, the convener of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, Maureen Watt, has written to Alex Neil, the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, requesting that he provide the committee with details of how the Scottish Government plans to engage on those matters, including whether the Government considers that any of the EU legislative and policy proposals raise subsidiarity concerns that are similar to the concerns that the committee has already expressed regarding the Commission’s proposals for a single national regulator as part of its review of European public procurement rules. Given the significant economic and social implications of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s EU priorities for Scotland, it is vital to ensure that Scotland’s national interests—as debated in this Parliament—are fully and timeously reflected in EU legislative proposals and policy discussions directly in Brussels, through the Commission, the European Parliament and our MEPs, and via the UK Government, so that we get EU policies that work for and in Scotland. As well as supporting the European and External Relations Committee’s motion, I will be taking forward the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s priorities as part of the committee and as its EU reporter, and ensuring that they are part and parcel of our scrutiny process.

6. To ask the Scottish Government when the fuel poverty forum will publish a report on its review. (S4O-00764)

The latest Scottish house condition survey, which is from 2009, shows that 41 per cent of households in Dumfries and Galloway are in fuel poverty compared with 28 per cent in Scotland as a whole. The region has the third-highest level of fuel poverty of all the Scottish local authority areas. What steps will the cabinet secretary encourage local authorities to take in order to ensure that information is forthcoming to all residents about what they can do to reduce fuel poverty?

I am delighted to speak in the first Parliament debate on climate justice and I am particularly pleased that the focus is on climate justice. As we have heard from other members, Scotland is a pioneer when it comes to tackling climate change, which is why we have an added responsibility in the world to aid nations that do not have the means to contribute as much to the global effort. When we talk about climate justice we are explicitly acknowledging, as we should, that climate change is fundamentally and inescapably an ethical issue. It is about the many ways in which the adverse effects of climate change are undermining human rights and inflicting harm on the poor and disadvantaged, in countries that bear no responsibility for creating the problem and whose institutions and finances are such that they are singularly ill-equipped to mitigate its effects. That is why I am pleased that the Scottish Parliament embedded in legislation the most ambitious climate change targets in the word, on which we are well on the way to making progress. It is also why I welcome the First Minister’s call for world leaders to make 2012 a year of climate justice, ahead of the UN conference on sustainable development in Rio in June. If we are to succeed in our aspiration to deliver climate justice, we need to influence others. Our influence can be brought to bear particularly at European Union level, where a wide range of legislation that impacts directly on climate change is enacted. In December, the European Commission published its “Energy Roadmap 2050”, which set a target to cut emissions by more than 80 per cent by 2050. The target will require almost complete decarbonisation of energy production in the EU and is entirely consistent with the policy of the Scottish Government and this Parliament. Scotland is uniquely well placed to contribute to the target, constituting as we do an estimated 25 per cent of total EU renewable energy potential.

I want to make progress, but I will come back to Neil Findlay if I get a chance to do so. As we make progress by encouraging the investments that are required to exploit such a tremendous economic resource, we will contribute positively to the delivery of climate justice across the world. In that sense, Scotland and its Government are investing in global climate justice. An aspect on which the EU could and should be performing better is the emission trading system; we must address the failings in the regime. Currently the ETS is failing to provide the incentives that energy companies need if they are to invest in long-term low-emissions sources of energy. The oversupply of carbon emission allowances, coupled with the effects of economic recession and energy-saving measures, has led to a dramatic fall in the market carbon price, which has virtually eliminated the incentive for companies to invest in carbon-free energy sources. There is little doubt that the problem has the potential to derail the EU’s target to reduce emissions overall by 20 per cent by 2020—let alone the increased target of 30 per cent that the Scottish Government advocates. If it is to tackle the problem, the EU must introduce measures that will push up the price of carbon, thereby providing an incentive for companies to invest in technologies—renewables, in particular—that reduce emissions. Any such action at EU level would help Scotland to achieve its target of a 42 per cent reduction by 2020. I am therefore pleased that the European Parliament’s Committee on Industry, Research and Energy voted this week to adopt an amendment to the energy efficiency directive that will allow permits in the ETS to be withheld so that the price will rise and investment in renewable energy sources will be stimulated. It is regrettable that, as is becoming increasingly clear, we are unlikely on our current trajectory to prevent climate change, so greater efforts must be devoted to mitigating the impact of climate change on vulnerable countries and communities. That is why the Scottish Government is committed not only to enhancing the climate challenge fund but to creating, with others, Scotland’s first climate justice fund. I welcome the minister’s announcement in that regard. There is no doubt that adapting to climate change will be one of the defining global challenges of the century. There will be a scientific and, no doubt, an economic challenge, but the dominant aspect will be the perhaps unparalleled ethical challenge that climate change will pose for us all, especially those of us who are better prepared for, and less directly affected by, a process that for many people, in the world’s poorest countries and most vulnerable communities, will be disruptive and almost certainly destructive. If society as a whole is to rise to the ethical challenge that climate change poses and deliver climate justice, much will be required of us all. Simple everyday actions have a part to play in reducing our carbon emissions. As Margaret McDougall said, we must think globally and act locally. This week I joined my South Scotland colleague, Claudia Beamish, to help care students at Dumfries and Galloway College launch their lug a mug project, which encourages staff and students to buy a reusable mug rather than use disposable cups for their coffee, as a practical way of helping the environment and promoting sustainability. This week also saw the publication of “A Flourishing Scotland”, which sets out Scotland’s voice ahead of the Rio+20 summit and is a result of work that has been undertaken by organisations in the public, private and third sectors. I commend all those who are involved, particularly Cifal Scotland and the Scotland and Northern Ireland Forum for Environmental Research. To conclude, I hope that we will support this important motion, because that will send a key message that Scotland’s Parliament accepts the ethical challenge of helping to secure climate justice and, in doing so, underlines its international responsibility and its commitment to a more sustainable future.

I thank the cabinet secretary for providing a robust and detailed plan on how the Scottish Government intends to achieve the aims of the digital future strategy. The digital future of Scotland is of the highest importance; it is central to achieving a fair, modern and competitive economy. By aiming not only for 85 to 90 per cent coverage of high-speed broadband by 2015, but for next-generation broadband to be available to all by 2020, the Government is demonstrating its ambition and its commitment to those ends. However, I appreciate that meeting those targets will not be without its challenges. The cost of upgrading the infrastructure to enable us to provide high-speed and even superfast broadband, although not prohibitive, will need to come from a variety of investment programmes. As we see from the infrastructure action plan, the private sector is investing, where commercially viable. That investment is vital, but it is not enough to stand alone. I commend the Scottish Government for securing £68.8 million from broadband development UK, although I only wish that it had been more, given the geographical issues that we have to overcome in Scotland, especially in our remote and local areas.

I would like to make some progress first, and then I will take an intervention. I also commend the Scottish Government for allocating £79.5 million from the Scottish budget to improving broadband services—including up to £25.5 million of European Union funds.

In the Highlands and Islands, £300 million must be paid, so £68.8 million is still not enough. We need more—and we need to consider European funding as well. Further EU funding might well be available in the next financial framework. The European Commission is proposing that some €9.2 billion be allocated over the period 2014 to 2020 to support upgrades to deliver faster internet connectivity, through its connecting Europe facility, and I hope that colleagues in this Parliament will give their support to that important initiative. Public funding of £185 million has already been identified, and establishing a £5 million seed fund for local projects by April this year will allow innovative solutions to evolve, with a longer-term view to national roll-out. An excellent example of how that is starting to take shape is the work of the south of Scotland alliance. As a member who represents South Scotland, I know only too well that the region is badly served by broadband access. Dumfries and Galloway is 31st out of Scotland’s 32 council areas for broadband availability, and approximately 15 per cent of phone lines across the region are unable to support 2 megabits per second. That is a totally unacceptable situation that must be—and is being—addressed. There is no doubt that the region’s economic development potential will not be exploited fully until it can boast the quality of internet connectivity that today’s businesses require. If we are to bring further investment to the south of Scotland, improving broadband infrastructure is critical. The south of Scotland alliance has developed a highly ambitious next-generation broadband programme, which seeks to ensure that the south will be at the forefront of the delivery of Scotland’s digital ambitions. As I have indicated, there are few more appropriate regions in Scotland to lead that initiative. The programme aims to play a lead role in transforming the delivery of public services, economic development and social cohesion in rural communities from Stranraer to Eyemouth. It is based on the type of partnership that the Scottish Government recognises is necessary if its digital ambitions for rural Scotland are to be realised. It involves Dumfries and Galloway and Borders councils, the two national health service health boards and Scottish Enterprise. I am delighted that, last November, the Scottish Government committed £5 million to commence the procurement phase of the south of Scotland alliance next-generation broadband project. The alliance is now working on a bid for providing next-generation broadband to cover 100 per cent of the south of Scotland population. The forecast cost is £120 million and, although both councils have agreed a joint commitment of £21 million in capital funding and £1.5 million in revenue over the lifetime of the project, the partnership is looking to various other sources of funding, including the UK Government and the EU, to bring the project to fruition. The efforts of the south of Scotland alliance project team are to be commended, and I thank the cabinet secretary for his continued support for the project. I briefly turn my attention to the elements of the motion that deal with 4G mobile broadband and mobile phone coverage, with regard to a meeting that I had this week with the mobile phone operator Three. As members will be aware, the UK Government holds the cards when it comes to auctioning the spectrum to operators, and delays on its part have meant that the UK has fallen significantly behind in progressing coverage. During my meeting with Three, it was clear that, apart from Greece, the UK will be the last west European country to auction 4G. That is in stark contrast with 2003, when we were the first to auction 3G, so I fully support the Scottish Government motion where it seeks to ensure that the roll-out of 4G in Scotland at least matches the UK average. However, we must impress on Westminster and Ofcom the importance of allowing the 4G auction to take place sooner rather than later, or we risk falling behind other European countries in our coverage and therefore in the take-up of broadband. The infrastructure action plan states: “empowering communities to develop tailored solutions to meet their local requirements can deliver significant benefits.” Yes—and the Scottish Government’s plans for a digital future in Scotland are ideal for empowering communities not only to develop the technology to sustain themselves but to encourage business growth, tourism and a subsequent increase in confidence in local economies. I commend the Scottish Government on its foresight in promoting the notion of a digital future for Scotland.

As a member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, and as a South Scotland list MSP who represents a large rural and farming community, I welcome this timely and most important debate on the future of the common agricultural policy. Food security will be one of the most critical issues in the coming years, and a thriving farm sector that preserves and develops the indigenous capacity to produce safe, secure, nutritious and diverse supplies of food is not a luxury but a necessity. That is especially relevant to the local food and drink sector across South Scotland and Dumfries and Galloway, which is one of the most successful drivers of economic growth in the region. The current discussions on the future of the CAP take place against the most difficult economic backdrop that we have experienced since the EU was established in 1957. Like all other sectors of society, Scotland’s farmers are facing very difficult financial and market conditions. More than ever, it is essential that the Scottish Government is able to represent the distinctive interests of our farming sector at the forthcoming CAP negotiations. The reforms must support our farmers and not damage them. In truth, our farming interests will be properly represented only when Scotland takes its own seat at the EU negotiating table as an independent member state and negotiates as an equal partner alongside the other national Governments. The vast majority of Scotland’s farmers do not believe that the UK Government’s position on CAP reform is in their best interests or reflects the serious challenges that they face. Scottish farming is different, but the differences seem to be lost on the UK Government. It is therefore essential that this Parliament fully engages in a debate, along with the Scottish Government, on the shape of the post-2014 CAP. We must develop a clear set of objectives for the CAP reforms and exert as much pressure as possible on the UK Government to ensure that Scotland’s views are represented as the negotiations proceed. Before considering some specific issues, I add my voice to those who are urging the European Commission to ensure that the reforms do not add to the complexity of the CAP. We need a simpler CAP and not a more complex regime. I want a CAP that gives maximum flexibility to those who implement the new arrangements to allow them to tackle the specific challenges that they face. Although the final shape of the reformed CAP is far from clear, we can endorse from a Scottish perspective a number of the underlying principles that inform the Commission’s proposals. I firmly believe that the maintenance of direct support to farmers, particularly those in fragile areas and sectors, should be the top priority of agricultural policy and our top negotiating point in the upcoming negotiations. Direct payments are crucial for Scotland’s farmers, and the phasing out or elimination of that arrangement would fundamentally undermine the sustainability of our rural communities. This is an instance when our Government’s position diverges from that which the UK Government is adopting, and that is causing concern in our farming sector. I urge the UK Government to retreat from its fixation on what is simply a cost-cutting measure, as it will jeopardise the welfare and future development of our farming sector and rural communities. I welcome the prospect of reforms that bring to an end what is, in effect, discrimination against new entrants to farming as a result of direct support being linked solely to past output levels. I want support to be geared towards farmers who are active and producing for the nation, and I therefore want to see new entrants coming into the sector. I will now focus on some aspects of the reforms that are important for our upland livestock farmers. First, to follow on from my previous point, there are understandable concerns about the shift from historical payments to area-based direct payments and the implications in terms of lost subsidy for smaller hill farmers. I acknowledge that the proposed reforms will make it easier for new entrants to the sector, but it is essential that the Scottish Government tailors the implementation of the new arrangements to meet the specific needs of our farming sector. I want the reforms to provide the flexibility to allow our Government to deliver an area-based system that meets our needs. Secondly, I am pleased that the proposals allow member states to set aside up to 5 per cent of their national envelopes for coupled payments to a variety of sectors. The Scottish beef calf scheme has shown that a certain number of headage payments are needed to maintain production in economically and environmentally fragile areas, and the scheme has succeeded in stabilising the drop in livestock numbers, as shown by the latest agricultural census. We need to retain our ability to run such a scheme, and indeed a case can be made for raising the ceiling beyond 5 per cent. ThirdIy, given that 85 per cent of Scottish land is eligible for less favoured area status, the future of the less favoured area support scheme, which invests about £64 million a year in some of Scotland’s most remote farming regions, is of great interest to us. LFASS is undergoing a thorough Europe-wide review, but to date we lack comprehensive impact assessments of the Commission’s new proposals, which makes it difficult to assess their consequences. I urge the Commission to come forward with the new maps of the LFA delineation as soon as possible. It is clear that the future rules of the CAP will be decided over the next 12 months or so. I want to ensure that the views of this Parliament and those of Scotland’s farmers are fully represented in the negotiations both directly in Brussels and via the UK Government. I hope that members who represent the parties that form the UK Government will join SNP members in ensuring that Scotland’s distinctive farming interests are fully recognised by London in the EU-level negotiations over the months ahead so that we have a CAP that works for and in Scotland. I am confident that, by the time we get to 2018 and the next round of CAP reforms post-2020, Scotland will be at the EU negotiating table, negotiating in our own right, pursuing our own priorities, influencing the EU agenda, and working together with our European partners on the challenges that our rural and farming communities face.

I am pleased to speak in today’s debate, given the importance of investment in infrastructure in Scotland, about which I do not think that anyone is in any doubt. I am proud of what the Scottish Government has managed to achieve in infrastructure investment, despite the unprecedented budget cut of 32 per cent in real terms from the United Kingdom Government. I am loth to start by stating the obvious, but I believe that the financial and constitutional constraints on the Parliament and the Government are restricting Scotland’s potential. Setting out our Government’s intentions through to 2030 is no mean feat, and I congratulate Alex Neil and his team on engineering a package that is so right for Scotland that we should all welcome it. As the cabinet secretary has already set out the main points of the plan, I will not repeat them all. Suffice it to say that we hear every day about the struggles that ordinary Scots face against the current economic backdrop. That is why I am pleased that the Government has recognised that, if Scotland is to continue to grow out of the recession and support our economy, we must have effective investment plans. There has been nearly £17 billion of capital funding over the five years since the SNP came into government—investment that affects every aspect of our daily lives in Scotland from education, health and housing to energy, transport and communities. We have heard the commitment from the cabinet secretary to continue to invest at the heart of what matters, providing maximum value for taxpayers’ money. I commend the forward thinking in the infrastructure investment plan. We must look to the future if we are to succeed in providing our communities with the tools and resources that they require to flourish. By spending between £3 billion and £4 billion each year on capital investment—between £45 billion and £60 billion over 15 years—we will support 1,400 jobs in the wider economy. If every £100 million of additional capital invested per year generates the estimated £160 million, our economy will stabilise, allowing people to have confidence in our home markets. We heard yesterday that private sector employment has increased and now accounts for 77.7 per cent of Scottish employment, the highest share since devolution. In the third quarter of 2011, the number of new jobs created in the private sector once again outweighed the number of jobs lost in the public sector. However, we must not lose sight of the importance of investment in the public sector. If we develop long-term infrastructure such as hospitals, schools and transport networks, we will continue to see positive growth patterns and tangible results that will give our communities confidence in their abilities and those in our workforce the stability that they need to improve their quality of life. In my region, I have already seen regeneration work to improve the standing of communities such as Stranraer. The £230 million redevelopment of Dumfries and Galloway royal infirmary via the NPD finance model and the new 85-bed acute mental health facility for NHS Dumfries and Galloway—on which £27.2 million is being spent—will help to reinvigorate the south of Scotland in a way that only public sector investment can. Jeff Ace, the new chief executive of NHS Dumfries and Galloway, said at a meeting of Dumfries and Galloway Council today that the new DGRI presents a once-in-a-generation opportunity to build a world-class facility. Future investment in transport links around the south of Scotland can only be positive for the area. Opening Stena Line’s new Loch Ryan port facility last month, the First Minister outlined the Scottish Government’s continued commitment not only to the Stranraer and Ayr to Glasgow railway line but to continuing to upgrade the vital A77 and A75. As the Deputy First Minister made clear at First Minister’s question time last week, work on the Dunragit bypass and the A77 at Maybole is due to start in spring 2012. Given the potential to position Stranraer as a major gateway to Scotland and the rest of Europe from Ireland and Northern Ireland, it would be worth exploring the possibility of leveraging in any European Union investment to link the development of our ports infrastructure in the south-west to the development of our roads and rail infrastructure through programmes such as the cross-border trans-European network transport projects and to broadband infrastructure through the EU’s proposed €40 billion connecting Europe facility. In this digital age, I am sure that we all acknowledge the importance of having the correct connectivity infrastructure to allow enterprises to grow. In particular, it allows rural businesses to conduct their affairs more effectively and connect with wider markets. Access to superfast broadband is therefore vital to the regional economy in ensuring that our rural businesses can expand, as well as attracting new businesses and connecting communities. I appreciate that the challenging rural geography of Scotland makes that an interesting feat but, with £144.3 million already being committed to the accelerated roll-out of next-generation broadband until 2015-16, we are well on our way to achieving the aim of having it available to all by 2020. As I represent one of the largest rural regions in the Parliament, South Scotland, I encounter daily the issues surrounding digital connectivity. It is therefore timely for me to pay tribute to the work of the south of Scotland alliance, which has been awarded £5 million by the Scottish Government to start the procurement phase of its next-generation broadband project. Without doubt, access to next-generation broadband will help the south of Scotland to compete on a level playing field with the rest of Scotland and the wider world. I commend the motion to Parliament. I very much hope that we can build support for the Government’s plan throughout the chamber this afternoon, given its importance to creating and supporting sustainable economic growth and jobs throughout Scotland through a positive future of investment.

The Scottish fishing fleet has been working extremely hard to become one of the most responsible in Europe in managing and conserving cod stocks in the North Sea in a sustainable and effective manner, but it seems to be taking more than its fair share of the pain from this year’s round of European fisheries negotiations. Given that the cabinet secretary has made the case in the past for devolving powers in fisheries management to a more local level, will he continue to push the case, especially in the context of the current round of CFP reforms, for greater decentralisation of power, so that real management decisions are left to our fishing nations, working regionally, with the EU setting only the broad principles?

I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak in this debate. Stuart McMillan has highlighted many of the issues regarding the strategic importance of Clyde coastguard and given that Clyde plays an important role in the coast of south-west Scotland—as far, in fact, as Scotland’s most southerly point, the Mull of Galloway—I agree whole-heartedly with his comments. Over the past six months, I have had a good deal of contact with local volunteer coastguard officers who cover the Solway coast and have real concerns about the UK Government’s vision of the future of the service. It is important to emphasise that they are volunteers and, as such, have no vested interest in employment with or career prospects in the MCA. However, they care about marine safety and have seen two sets of proposals that they believe are ill conceived at best and downright dangerous at worst—not my words, but theirs. The Solway highlights an issue that has not been properly addressed by either set of proposed structures. Operational responsibility for the Solway is split between Clyde and Liverpool, with Clyde having responsibility as far south as the Mull of Galloway. lndeed, Clyde recently co-ordinated the response when Stena Navigator’s engines lost power off the Rhinns of Galloway. Given that the Scottish coast from there to the east—as well as the whole of the English side of the Solway—is the operational responsibility of Liverpool maritime rescue co-ordination centre, there is an in-built cross-border issue to deal with. Moreover, the proposed closure of the Clyde and Liverpool stations gives rise to additional unwelcome uncertainty over the Solway. In the first debate on this subject, which took place in January, my predecessor Alasdair Morgan made that very point in response to the first set of consultation proposals. Although we are eight months on, it seems to me that the issue of operational cover for the Solway remains unresolved. As a result, I welcome Keith Brown’s actions in writing to Mike Penning to highlight the very specific issues regarding the Solway and await Mr Penning’s reply with interest. I also welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments that the Scottish Government will work to ensure an appropriate level of cover for the Solway. Of course, Mr Penning has already argued that retaining half of each pair of centres should allay my concerns on the basis that local knowledge will be retained. That means the Solway being covered by Holyhead and Belfast rather than Clyde and Liverpool. He repeated that argument at length in the House of Commons on Tuesday. However, we should consider the extent to which that new arrangement will deliver as far as local knowledge is concerned. The volunteers whom I spoke about earlier point to incidents in which local knowledge was preserved when one station was out of action by a member of staff being sent from that facility to man a desk at its paired station. Correspondence that the volunteers obtained for me states: “Regional contingency planning sets out procedures for staff from an ‘unavailable’ station to proceed to the paired station in the event of a protracted outage.” If the pairing system enshrines local knowledge in the way that Mr Penning has suggested, why would that most analogue of solutions be necessary? Given that that is the situation right now, how will the retention of one of each pair preserve local knowledge in any way? I invite members to compare the operational guidance that I have just quoted with a statement in the consultation document on the revised proposals. That document says: “we should also plan on retaining one of each of the current ‘pair’ of stations where staff are already familiar with, and frequently exercise, taking calls and managing incidents in an adjacent area.” The latter gives the impression of a well-oiled machine and a seamless transfer of responsibilities among staff who know each other’s patch; the former is rather less persuasive. However, we are to believe that retaining one of each pair of stations—where the current contingency plan, we should bear in mind, is for an officer “to proceed” to the other station in times of crisis—will preserve local knowledge after the two stations that have direct operational responsibility for the Solway have both been closed. I remain to be convinced by that, and I am by no means alone in my scepticism.

I want to get through quite a lot on the impact on the Solway. The Irish Sea has a busy winter scallop fishery, which is, by its very nature, given the time of year and the prevailing weather, not without risk. Locally, Dumfries and Galloway Council wishes to market Stranraer as a destination for sailors and sea anglers, and to capitalise on its easy access to the Clyde and the west coast as a whole. There is a sizeable marina in Kirkcudbright and there are popular smaller anchorages, such as in Kippford. A popular trip is crossing the Solway to Maryport; the more adventurous may attempt going to the Isle of Man if the conditions are right. All of those things amount to varied use of a challenging and occasionally treacherous sea area. There are busy ferry routes from Ireland to Scotland and Wales, and from Liverpool to the Isle of Man, offshore wind farms, and the potential for tidal or wave power generation in the future. Therefore, there are ample reasons for maintaining the existing level of cover, but there is little reassurance that crucial local knowledge will be maintained. One way in which cover might have been maintained and might still be maintained, of course, would be through responsibility for Scotland’s coastguard being fully devolved to the Scottish Government. I accept that operational cover issues in the Solway would still have to be addressed, but I believe that the Scottish Government has a better assessment of the value of the coastguard service. Devolving responsibility for the coastguard and marine safety to Scotland would permit us to develop a service that meets the needs of Scotland’s marine sector for the 21st century. Now that we have seen the UK Government’s vision, I know which option I prefer. I hope that colleagues across the chamber will support the Scottish Government’s motion and make it clear to the UK Government that, as the motion states, “this piecemeal approach driven by a cost-cutting agenda cannot deliver a proper strategy for maritime safety in Scotland.”

I welcome this important debate on the negotiations in Durban next week. The seriousness of climate change is not underestimated by our Government, this Parliament or the people of Scotland. The challenges, as we all know, are considerable. Earlier this month, the International Energy Agency published its “World Energy Outlook 2011” document. As Graeme Dey has already said, that report highlighted that, if we are to achieve the long-term goal of limiting the rise in global temperature to a manageable 2 per cent, urgent action needs to be taken to reduce CO2 emissions on a global scale. The report makes it clear that the window for introducing effective action is closing quickly. If that vital long-term target is to be met—and the risks are increasing that it will not be—global emissions must peak by 2020 and decline thereafter. For that crucial target to be met, progress has to be made at next week’s climate change conference in Durban. Climate change is often viewed as solely a problem for our future generations. However, the reality is that the damaging effects are already having a human impact. From risks to agricultural production in Africa to coastal erosion in South Uist, the effects are real and we must act not as individual nations but as one planet together. We have heard from various members about the positive and world-leading steps that Scotland is taking in the fight against climate change, and it is right that we do so. Scotland has some of the world’s most progressive and ambitious climate change legislation. As a nation we are blessed with energy resources from the old but still vital technologies in oil, coal and gas, to the newer, greener developing technologies in wind, hydro, wave, tidal and solar. We should be viewing those technologies as an opportunity not just to cut back on our carbon emissions, but to boost our economy and create jobs. It is estimated that there are already 10,000 jobs in the clean fossil fuels and carbon capture and storage industries in Scotland alongside 3,000 additional jobs in renewables. That is just the tip of the iceberg, and we are likely to see an increase many times over in the years ahead. This year alone has seen the announcement of more than £160 million in investment by renewable energy developers, with the potential to add 400 more jobs. As we look ahead to next week’s 17th UN conference of the parties, Scotland has a positive message to take to Durban: implementing actions that limit climate change is not only essential for the future wellbeing of our societies, but good for stimulating economic growth and creating jobs. That positive message is urgently needed. It is clear that, at best, the Durban conference will provide a stepping stone to a successor to the Kyoto treaty, which expires at the end of 2012. However, although everyone now agrees that time is running out to have a new version of Kyoto in place before the end of 2012, it is imperative that progress is made in Durban on preparing the ground for a new treaty to be signed by 2015. Part of that progress could be in securing agreement that a second emissions target commitment period will commence in 2012 upon the expiry of the first. Doubtless even that interim measure will be difficult to agree with those seeking a binding treaty to succeed Kyoto, including the 27 members of the EU, being reluctant to move forward unless the world’s largest emitters, who remain outside the Kyoto framework, undertake to participate in a future, legally binding emissions reduction framework. There is always the risk that the failure of the Durban conference to achieve a comprehensive agreement on the successor to the Kyoto protocol will reduce pressure on some Governments to adhere to the climate change targets that have previously been adopted. Needless to say, that would be a disastrous reaction. Accordingly, I was pleased that the European Parliament last week adopted a resolution underlining the EU’s commitment to the Kyoto protocol and that the EU should give public and unequivocal support to its continuation at the Durban conference. That resolution also made clear the European Parliament’s belief that the European Union must raise its game regardless of the commitments of the carbon giants of the United States of America and China, by committing to a 30 per cent instead of 20 per cent target for cutting greenhouse gas emissions by 2020. I was also pleased to note that in the resolution, like this Parliament before it, the European Parliament recognised the key links between combating climate change and achieving higher rates of sustainable economic growth. In Scotland, we are demonstrating that investing in green technologies is a key source of growth and employment, even in the tough economic conditions in which we find ourselves. The Scottish Government has shown that it is ready and willing to take a lead in implementing measures that are designed to make a real impact on tackling climate change. In Scotland, we have shown that we are prepared to lead by example. I hope that the EU will do likewise. It is vital that the reluctance of some countries to commit fully to an ambitious, comprehensive and legally binding international framework that is designed to tackle climate change should not be used by the EU as a reason to lessen its commitment to the endeavour. I hope that Stewart Stevenson will take that message from this Parliament to Durban next week. I urge the UK Government to fully endorse that message.

I welcome the opportunity to put on record once again my views on the housing situation in Scotland. In debating the motion, we need to consider the effects on house building and housing of the current UK Tory-Liberal coalition Government’s economic and social policies. As Keith Brown said in his opening remarks, the unprecedented cuts in public spending that the UK coalition Government has implemented are undoubtedly the single biggest cause of the decline in house building throughout the country. If Alex Johnstone is serious about addressing that problem and if he wants to see an upturn in house building, I encourage him to add his voice to the Scottish Government’s demands that David Cameron and George Osborne immediately change course and increase spending on capital projects, particularly on house building. We should all recognise that housing is fundamentally about people and that social housing is often about protecting the welfare of our most vulnerable and disadvantaged people. If Alex Johnstone is concerned about that, as he seems to be, I again urge him to join us in campaigning against the Tory reforms to housing benefit, which will hit the poorest people in society hardest. Housing associations the length and breadth of Scotland are telling us that reducing housing benefit is a direct attack on the poor. In a housing debate on 6 October, prior to her elevation to the leadership, Ruth Davidson spoke of first-time buyers’ struggle to get on the property ladder because of the high deposit required and pointed out that people of a similar age to herself—that is, early to mid-30s—were below the average age for getting a first-time buyer mortgage; it tends to be 36 to 37-year-olds who are able to get on the housing ladder for the first time. How, then, can she justify the Westminster-led benefit reforms that will raise the age at which the local housing allowance rate will apply? With that move, 4,400 single people in Scotland aged between 25 and 34 without dependants will be restricted in their ability to apply for housing assistance. The Conservative motion proposes that the Scottish Government remove the limitations on right to buy that were introduced in 2010. The right-to-buy policy, which was introduced by a Tory Government, has been a disaster in Scotland and has led to more than half a million homes being taken out of social housing stock, leaving councils unable to address housing needs in their areas. Few would dispute that the right-to-buy policy destroyed the council house building programme in Scotland; indeed, the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations has said that it has been absolutely disastrous for the low-cost homes for rent sector. Instead of voting for a Tory party determined to push social housing stocks down further, leaving less of a chance of getting affordable housing, the people of Scotland voted for an SNP Government that was determined to see through its vision for a fairer Scotland.

No—I want to keep going. This Scottish Government has a proven track record not only of investment in housing despite the severe funding constraints—indeed, it has invested £1.7 billion in affordable housing between 2008 and 2011—but of house building. Between 2009 and 2011, 3,295 council houses were approved and, in 2010, 1,055 were started. That is the highest recorded figure in 20 years.

The Scottish Government is doing everything that it can in very difficult financial circumstances to provide affordable, sustainable and original housing solutions such as the innovation and investment fund, which is building 3,462 new homes, and the national housing trust, which is kick-starting stalled construction sites. Although I welcome the fact that the Conservative party has brought this important issue to the chamber, its motion simply urges us to turn the clock back and repeat the mistakes of the failed policies of the past. Instead, we must move forward in a spirit of consensus, building on legislation that the Parliament has already passed and continuing to find and develop innovative ways of supporting our affordable housing market.

I welcome the debate. The regeneration of our towns and communities is one of the key elements in the Government’s strategy for tackling the deep-seated inequalities that continue to blight our society and limit the opportunities for our citizens—indeed, whole families—to realise their potential. I go further: I suggest that regeneration is possibly the single most important policy at our disposal if we are to make real inroads into improving the life chances of many of our most vulnerable and disadvantaged people by combating the vicious cycle of deprivation to which far too many individuals and families are consigned for reasons that are entirely outside their control. Regeneration is about communities and neighbourhoods, whether in our cities, towns or smaller villages throughout rural Scotland. It is focused on improving the places where people live. It is about creating jobs, improving housing, tackling poverty and empowering those who have the skills and resources to make a difference. It is about transforming possibilities, raising aspirations and enhancing prospects. If we are able to achieve that and to improve lives—that is the Government’s absolute aim—we will make a significant contribution to reducing the future demand, especially the failure demand, on our public services. Regeneration is not only about economic development, although that is an essential element; it is also about delivering social justice and reducing the inequalities that fundamentally curtail the life chances of far too many of our citizens. That aspiration underpinned the regeneration discussion paper that the cabinet secretary published in February this year and it is increasingly being turned into reality by the policies that this Government is implementing. As we have heard from the cabinet secretary this afternoon, the Scottish Government has invested more than £90 million in Scotland’s urban regeneration companies since 2007. More than 1,300 new jobs have been created as a result. Our substantially increased investment in skills, employment measures, housing, transport and infrastructure is playing a central role in delivering our regeneration strategy. Of course, the sheer scale of the challenges, coupled with the current economic and financial climate, inevitably mean that there is still much to do. Although there is no getting away from the reality that hard cash matters if we are successfully to deliver our regeneration strategy, let us not forget one of the key messages of the Christie commission: communities must be empowered to help themselves. This Government is fully committed to releasing the potential of Scotland’s communities to do things for themselves. In addition to putting in resources, we have to ensure that communities have the leadership needed to drive forward the regeneration process and that all our public service agencies—public sector and third sector—are operating in an integrated manner and thinking creatively about solutions that might work in particular localities. As a South Scotland MSP, I want to mention one very good example of regeneration in my region: the waterfront project in Stranraer. That programme stems from the forthcoming opening of Stena Line UK’s new operation at Old House Point, near Cairnryan, which will create the opportunity for real transformational change for Stranraer. A master plan is in place to guide the regeneration programme, central to which is ensuring that the waterfront and the existing town centre are developed as one distinctive and successful visitor destination. The basis of that is to develop Stranraer and Loch Ryan as a centre of excellence for marine leisure and green tourism, with opportunities for new business, retail and housing developments and enhanced public space for residents and visitors. All that builds on the inherent strengths of the south-west of Scotland. Efforts to achieve that have already started. A Scottish Government-backed town centre regeneration fund project of £790,000 has transformed the town centre at Castle Square, which recently won the Saltire Society’s award for the use of art in public places—the design was by two local artists, Matt Baker and David Ralston. A new shore-block facility is being built to support an increase in sailing from the marina, supported by a joint European Union grant shared with Northern Ireland and Ireland. Delivering such a transformational change in the current economic and financial climate will be a challenge, given the level of public and private sector investment required. Finding new and innovative ways to secure such investment is key. Although council capital borrowing capacity is one option to lever in EU and other grant support, I believe that there is a real opportunity for the Scottish Government to support rural regeneration through new public-private financial instruments such as tax increment financing. However, we also need to consider how asset-backed financial vehicles such as JESSICA could be used in rural areas such as the south-west of Scotland to help achieve the scale of investment required. In the context of the Scottish economy, the value of a successful Stranraer regeneration programme cannot be underestimated, given the potential to position Stranraer not just as a major gateway to Scotland from Ireland but as a major gateway to Europe from Ireland. I know that the fundamental objectives that underpin this Government’s regeneration strategy are shared across the chamber and I do not doubt for one second that colleagues from all political parties feel as strongly as we in the Scottish National Party do about tackling the profound inequalities of opportunity that characterise far too many communities in Scotland. I hope that this debate will provide an opportunity for us all to consider constructively how we might take this shared agenda forward to the benefit of those whom we all seek to help.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what European Union issues were discussed at the most recent meeting of the joint ministerial committee on Europe. (S4O-00281)

Since part of the EU’s proposed multi-annual financial framework for 2014 to 2020 includes €80 billion for the horizon 2020 future framework programme for research and innovation—which will be vital for Scotland’s university and research sectors and small and medium-sized enterprises—will the cabinet secretary press the UK Government to take account of Scotland’s interests when it is formulating its position for the EU budget and horizon 2020 negotiations?

I thank Jenny Marra for raising in Parliament the important issue of fuel poverty in Scotland. We all regularly discuss the matter in debates, because it affects all constituencies—or one third of all households, to be exact. Rural households are twice as likely to be in fuel poverty as urban households. I have a particular regional interest in that because I represent South Scotland where about 41 per cent of families are said to be living in fuel poverty—the third-highest rate in Scotland. Thanks to the Scottish Government’s home insulation scheme, £300,000 will go towards assisting some 6,500 homes in Stranraer and north Rhins that have the highest levels of deprivation. The debate is timely; the Scottish Government is already asking whether we are ready for winter. I have been asking my constituents that, and have written to all domestic fuel providers in South Scotland to find out how they are encouraging customers to be prepared. Launching the campaign on Monday, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, Kenny MacAskill, rightly said that no one can be certain what this winter will bring weatherwise. For that reason, we must ensure that people are adequately prepared for every eventuality. Let us be clear; it is not just in the winter months that fuel poverty becomes apparent, but it is a key indicator of where work needs to be done to protect the most vulnerable people in our society. I am delighted that, at the start of this month, the Scottish Government announced a 35 per cent funding increase for fuel poverty and energy efficiency programmes. That involves an extra £5 million being put into the energy assistance package, and is a measure that is designed to help hard-pressed families in Scotland to make it through this winter without added financial burden. I am sure that members will welcome the commitment that has been made by the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, Alex Neil, in his statement to Parliament on 5 October, to review the fuel poverty strategy to take into account recent energy company price rises. It has been estimated that the recent fuel price increases will push up to 170,000 more Scottish households into fuel poverty. That is unacceptable by any standards, and I know that the cabinet secretary is pursuing that issue with UK Government counterparts. It is clear to me that, until Scotland has complete control over our energy resources, we cannot realise our full potential as an energy leader in Europe. Furthermore, that would ensure that we were able to tackle fuel poverty more effectively and efficiently.

No. I would like to keep going. At the Scottish National Party conference in Inverness last week, Alex Neil announced a £1.5 million increase in the boiler scrappage scheme. That scheme has been a resounding success, and it will cover more than 10,000 houses in Scotland. In the face of savage budget cuts from Westminster, the SNP remains committed to eliminating fuel poverty and to using every resource that is currently available to do so. Within that remit falls the fuel poverty forum and the renewed approach that boosts links with the sustainable housing strategy group. Joint action can be taken on housing and fuel poverty. That is exactly where things need to start. I have given just a few recent examples of what the Scottish Government is doing to ensure that fuel poverty levels are decreasing in Scotland. I pay tribute to the other organisations that are playing their part in driving down the worrying statistics; local authorities and third sector organisations such as Energy Action Scotland and the Energy Saving Trust are also working to eradicate fuel poverty, and registered social landlords are building energy efficiency measures into new-build housing. For example, people who live in the new Dumfries and Galloway Housing Partnership homes in Stranraer that were built under the neighbourhood renewal programme benefit from much lower fuel bills because of the high levels of insulation and other energy efficiency measures. We must inspire a generation of Scots to drive down fuel poverty and to create awareness of fuel efficiency measures that we hope will carry on to future generations. The Parliament must work towards that. A legacy that I am sure that we would all welcome is the eradication of fuel poverty in Scotland.

I welcome the opportunity to participate in today’s debate on an issue as important as housing and I have no doubt that everyone in the chamber should support the measures outlined in the minister’s speech and in the motion. Housing is an issue that arises in every constituency and region represented in the Parliament and I am delighted that the Scottish Government is tackling it head on. Housing remains a priority for the SNP Government and I greatly welcome that. The “Homes Fit for the 21st Century” policy paper that was published in February this year makes no apology for setting ambitious housing targets, and nor should it. Between 2009 and 2011, 3,295 council houses were approved and, in 2010, 1,055 were started. That is the highest figure in 20 years and a record of which we can be proud. We are seeing a Government working with local authorities and the industry to find innovative ways of plugging the affordable housing gap. Given the pressures on public finances and the UK Government’s drastic squeeze on capital spending in Scotland, the current emphasis on innovation and on ways to deliver more housing for less public subsidy is crucial. That is why I am particularly pleased with and supportive of the innovation and investment fund. That fund alone is providing £2.5 million of investment in Dumfries and Galloway. That is a huge boost for the projects that it will assist in Dumfries, Castle Douglas, Dalbeattie, Newton Stewart, Thornhill and Lockerbie. The fact that nine of the 10 submitted bids for that area were accepted shows that the SNP Government is listening and taking note of where issues are arising. Not only that, but the Government is addressing those needs by providing vital funding. The fund also allows us to address the national housing challenges, which are all the more acute as a consequence of Westminster-based cuts. The Tories’ right-to-buy policy depleted much of Scotland’s social housing stock, which adds to the challenges that we now face in delivering an adequate provision of social housing. As a direct result of the Scottish Government’s policy of restricting the right to buy for new council tenants, we have seen a growing confidence from councils, which are willing to invest in new social housing. In that, our councils are supported by Scottish Government initiatives such as the new national housing trust, which is an additional tool to help to make more new affordable homes available for below market rent in areas where not enough affordable housing is available to meet demand. The trust not only reinvigorates the housing market but offers the construction industry support. In recent times, how many of us have passed building sites where work has had to stop because of financial constraints? The national housing trust scheme is a way of ensuring that that work can restart and continue to an end point, which will help to rejuvenate the construction sector and to deliver a good stock of new-build houses. Not only do we often see halted building works, but I am sure that many of us will agree that it is unacceptable that good homes should lie empty for long periods. Scotland is estimated to have 25,000 long-term-empty homes. That is a complete and utter waste when we consider the level of homelessness. The SNP wants to give councils powers to increase the council tax that is levied on properties that are empty for six months or more, which will tackle the problem of empty homes. Councils will be given the option to decide to charge an additional levy or to give exemptions in some cases. In addition to encouraging the reduction of empty properties, that measure could raise up to £30 million a year for councils to spend on affordable homes. Throughout the debate, the word “affordable” has been key. Rural communities feel that just as sharply as urban areas do. Just this week, the Bank of Scotland rural housing review said that house prices in rural Scotland have more than doubled in the past decade. The average price of a house in rural Scotland has risen by almost £80,000 since 2001. Affordable housing has always been particularly difficult to provide in rural parts of Scotland, but recent financial constraints have made that even more difficult. In such times, we appreciate even more keenly the work of organisations such as the rural housing partnership among three housing charities, including the Dumfries & Galloway Small Communities Housing Trust from my region. Those charities were instrumental in five of the recently approved innovation and investment fund bids and have a track record of working directly with rural communities to enable the provision of innovative, affordable rural housing developments. That can include providing low-cost self-build plots, selling discounted housing in conjunction with private developers and securing low-cost land for social housing projects. Essential to those bodies’ approach is identifying where need is greatest and working with communities and a broad range of partners. Most important, they are flexible, so they can alter their solutions for each community. For those reasons, they and others that do similar work should be congratulated. I commend the motion to Parliament and support the Scottish Government in all its efforts to help the affordable housing market. I hope very much that members across the chamber will do the same.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to introduce an integrated system of health and social care, in light of the report by the commission on the future delivery of public services. (S4O-00254)

In the light of that, does the cabinet secretary agree that preventative spending will be a major contributor to ensuring that public services can deal with the demographic challenges that lie ahead?

I thank Christine Grahame for securing the debate. It revolves around a single fundamental problem that has already been well rehearsed: neither the Scottish Borders nor Dumfries and Galloway is currently well served by local or national TV coverage. Christine Grahame has already eloquently explained the nature of the deficit, but the point cannot be made firmly enough. I ask members to consider this scenario: what if, instead of seeing the first of the ground-breaking prime ministerial debates that were broadcast during the previous Westminster general election, the inhabitants of Cumbria had been offered a Scotland friendly international football match? Border TV viewers in Dumfries and Galloway and the Scottish Borders were expected to tolerate the direct equivalent: instead of the Scottish election leaders debates, they were offered an England friendly. Not only that, but the level of local news coverage that is devoted to either area is paltry. If there was ever an area of Scotland that was crying out for local TV, it is the south. It cries out for such a service not least to redress a historical imbalance in reporting that neglects to transmit many important local and national stories to viewers in the region. At this point, only Ayr and Carlisle have been offered the chance to bid. It is true that broadcasts from a Carlisle local TV service would reach a proportion of viewers in Dumfries and Galloway, but they would not cover Wigtownshire. In any case, I must remind colleagues that Wigtownshire was historically accustomed to getting clearer transmissions from Ulster, at least in some remoter parts of the county. Of course, the Borders simply drops off the map. Jeremy Hunt’s decision is particularly disappointing because a good deal of work has been done through the south of Scotland alliance to make the case for local TV for the south of Scotland. The Border TV region was the first to go through the digital switchover process. Back then, the alliance recognised that the switchover presented an opportunity to do things differently. There is now spectrum capacity throughout Scotland to allow for the creation of the Scottish digital network that the Scottish Broadcasting Commission proposed. That would offer a pan-Scotland service as a single national channel or as a federal channel of more localised services. Such a strategic approach would give the service the critical mass to have a commercially credible business model, especially if it were treated in a similar manner to S4C in Wales or MG Alba in Scotland and awarded funding support under the public service broadcasting principles that underpin those services. Therefore, it is especially disappointing that the UK minister has come down in favour of the simplistic view of commercially viable, large-scale local TV operations, by and large in the main urban centres, rather than the more enlightened dialogue for which he was responsible beforehand, which actively encouraged consideration of alternative models to re-invigorate local press businesses. A federal approach to a Scottish digital network would be predicated on that kind of thinking. Local organisations could gather and produce local interest content and would be able to distribute it across print, internet, radio and TV channels, providing employment and skills enhancement where they are needed most, as well as fulfilling the audience appetite for local content in news and other entertainment genres. In short, the approach on which Jeremy Hunt has settled in no way fits the needs of the south of Scotland, but I contend that, however inadvertently, he has made the case for a Scottish digital network with a strong local focus even more clear cut than it was before. I want Mr Hunt to reconsider and to make the same offer to the south of Scotland that he has made to other areas, but I am also under no illusion that the only long-term solution is a Scottish digital network that has the capacity better to reflect the rich and varied life and culture of the region that I represent and of Scotland as a whole.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement. Given the importance of fuel poverty to households across Scotland, what recent engagement has the cabinet secretary had with the UK Government on such key energy matters and particularly on ensuring that we have a fair deal on energy for consumers in Scotland?

I welcome this timely debate on the reform of the common fisheries policy as the EU discussions get under way in Brussels. I also welcome the cabinet secretary’s outlining of the Scottish Government’s priorities for protecting Scotland’s crucial fishing industry and communities. On 13 July, the European Commission published its proposals for a major reform of the CFP. Those proposals will impact on one of Scotland’s most important economic sectors, determine the future of our fishing industry and the livelihoods of our fishermen, and impact on entire towns and communities around Scotland’s shores. Despite the fact that the proposals will impact principally on Scotland’s shores, given that over 70 per cent of all the fish that are caught in UK waters are landed in Scotland, Scotland’s cabinet secretary must rely on an invitation by the UK Government to participate fully in key fisheries council meetings so that he can be part of the crucial EU decision-making process. Ministers from the landlocked Czech Republic, Slovakia and Luxembourg have the right to attend those meetings, in which they have no national interest, whereas Scotland, a country with an absolutely vital national interest in the future of the CFP, is excluded from them, unless the UK Government permits our minister to attend. That is not only unacceptable; it is an insult to the individuals and communities whose livelihoods will be determined by the decisions that are made in Brussels. In a debate in the chamber two weeks ago, Opposition members urged the Scottish Government to bring forward reasons why it wanted the Scotland Bill to be amended to give Scottish ministers the right to attend meetings of the EU council when a devolved matter is being debated. I can think of no better illustration of the Scottish Government’s case than the crucial discussions to reform the CFP, at which Scotland’s vital national interests are at stake.

I would like to make progress. I simply do not accept the proposition that the UK Government has a sufficiently detailed knowledge and understanding of the Scottish fishing industry, of the Scottish Government’s policies towards the industry or, indeed, of the significance of fishing to our communities, to properly represent Scotland’s interests in the area. In support of my argument, I offer the fact that, prior to devolution, I understand that it was customary for a minister from the Scottish Office to participate in the UK delegation to the fisheries council precisely for that reason. I hope that those who question the Scottish Government’s motivation in proposing the amendment to the Scotland Bill will reflect on the fact that there are extremely valid reasons for it. However, we can also reflect on much wider evidence that reforming the CFP must involve those who understand the industry and represent the communities that are involved in it. Few members will be surprised when I say that the CFP has been bad for Scotland, the industry and fish stocks. There is now general acceptance that the CFP is a failed policy. Even the European Commission accepted that in its April 2009 green paper, but instead of acknowledging that the cause of the failure is the policies that it has foisted on the industry, the Commission now offers as the way forward yet another round of centrally planned and implemented reforms under its control. That is hardly the radical reform for which many of us had hoped. The Commission has seemed incapable of accepting that the way forward is to give the powers that it has misused to Europe’s fishing nations to manage better their fisheries and protect the marine environment. The SNP Government’s record on that is exemplary, with the establishment in 2008 of its ground-breaking conservation credits scheme. That scheme is now widely adopted throughout the EU and remains a central plank in the partnership that has been forged between the Scottish Government and Scotland’s fishermen to manage fish stocks and ensure that the industry has a viable future. The Commission’s CFP reform proposals begin to recognise that responsibility for the future sustainability of our fishing industry must be returned to the countries and communities that are involved in it. Although I welcome that recognition, albeit that it is belated, the Commission’s proposals for regionalisation are much too modest in scope and do not go far enough. The real management decisions should be left to our fishing nations, which must work regionally, with the EU setting only broad principles. The Commission’s proposals for an EU-wide mandatory discards ban and mandatory tradeable fishing concessions scheme are of deep concern, as other members have mentioned. We must guard against any potential threat to the relative stability principle and ensure that Scotland retains its historical fishing rights. Therefore, it is vital that Scotland’s interests be represented in the negotiations. Part of the responsibility for that falls to our MEPs, with whom we must work closely. However—I make no apology for returning to this theme—Scotland has no direct representation on the arguably more important Council of Ministers. I genuinely hope that, as this important debate proceeds, colleagues from other parties will reflect on the Scottish Government’s proposal that we be represented on the relevant UK delegations to ensure that the interests not of the SNP but of Scotland’s fishing industry and communities be represented in Brussels and that Scotland’s voice be as strong as possible. Scotland’s interest in the CFP debate will, as with all other EU policy areas, be properly represented only when Scotland becomes a full member state with its own commissioner, its own representative and many more MEPs.

I am just about to finish. In the meantime, matters will be improved only if the Parliament endorses the Scottish Government’s proposed amendment to the Scotland Bill and it is included in any subsequent Westminster Scotland act.

7. To ask the Scottish Government how the Scottish Futures Trust promotes the non-profit distributing programme. (S4O-00180)

What progress is being made in meeting local authorities’ requests to take advantage of the NPD programme under the Scottish Futures Trust for financing capital projects?

4. To ask the First Minister what recent discussions the Scottish Government has had with the United Kingdom Government regarding transmission charges for companies wishing to connect to the UK grid. (S4F-00143)

Earlier this week, Scottish Renewables chief executive Niall Stuart claimed that the proposed 1,600MW of wave and tidal projects that are planned for Pentland Firth and Orkney waters face an annual grid charge of £56 million, compared with the subsidy of £11 million that they would receive if they were sited off the south-west coast of England. Is it the case that that unfair discrepancy in connection charges could jeopardise Scotland’s fulfilment of its massive potential in renewables? Will the First Minister again urge the UK Government to look at the issue?

I, too, congratulate Bill Kidd on bringing such an important motion to the Parliament. It is supported across the chamber and across the South Scotland region that I was elected to represent. An international day of peace only serves to remind us of the conflicts that are going on around the world every day. I give my full support to the peace movements that are working to bring an end to such disputes and I will focus my speech on exploring the distinctive contribution that Scotland can make, working together with others, in helping the international community to address the global challenges that face our society in our peacebuilding efforts. We need look only as far as Norway, Sweden and Ireland in determining how Scotland can play a part in such processes. As my colleague Humza Yousaf pointed out, since the early 1990s, Norway has played a crucial role as a facilitator in a number of peace and reconciliation processes. In assisting with negotiations with Guatemala, Sri Lanka and Sudan and in providing aid to Somalia, Norway has modelled itself on the stability and neutrality that are conducive to playing a key role in peace processes. In several conflict areas, Norway’s role has been to support the UN’s efforts. That has been a vital element of Norway’s participation in the international community. Norway is one of the most important financial contributors on the issue. With several UN funds and programmes, it is one of the three largest contributors in absolute terms. It has contributed substantially to several UN peacekeeping missions and more than 50,000 Norwegians have served in UN-led peace operations. Similarly, Sweden actively participates in various peacekeeping missions and provides humanitarian assistance. It was Sweden that pushed for the UN to form the Peacebuilding Commission and it has had the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute since 1966. That was the idea of the then Swedish Prime Minister and was supported by the Swedish Parliament. The purpose of the institute is to conduct scientific research on questions of conflict and co-operation that are of importance for international peace and security, with the aim of contributing to an understanding of the conditions for peaceful solutions of international conflicts and stable peace. Moving across the water to our neighbours in Ireland, we see another small nation working independently to benefit international relations. Ireland is also actively involved with the UN Peacebuilding Commission, with further effectiveness coming in the shape of the Irish Government’s standing interdepartmental committee on peacekeeping. All those examples bring me to the conclusion that Scotland needs a place in the international peace community. We could certainly contribute much by offering the support that is needed to broker peaceful deals. CIFAL Findhorn, the UN Institute for Training and Research-affiliated centre in Moray, is proof that we have the talent and facilities and the desire to help. The SNP has been a long-standing supporter of the establishment of international peacekeeping and humanitarian missions that will support the efforts of Scots who volunteer their services abroad. I cannot help but come to the conclusion that we should have a Scottish peace corps, which could allow Scots to participate through existing organisations and provide opportunities where none currently exists. I would be delighted if the minister would have a meeting to consider that notion. In that context, I am also keen to see Scotland become associated with the European voluntary humanitarian aid corps following the current pilot phase. Inspired by the vision for the European peace corps that was set out in the Treaty of Lisbon, the European Commission has started the practical implementation of that pilot initiative by selecting, training and deploying the first team of European humanitarian volunteers. The project is exciting and it will give people across Europe the opportunity to make a real difference in the world; one that will harness the overwhelming willingness to volunteer to provide humanitarian aid. In years to come, I look forward to seeing many independent Scots becoming ambassadors for peace through such schemes.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to strengthen Scotland’s representation in EU negotiations and discussions. (S4O-00140)

I look forward to this afternoon’s debate. Does the cabinet secretary agree that, given that the Treaty on European Union has since 1993 provided for ministers from devolved Governments to lead their national delegations in the Council of Ministers, the Scottish Government’s proposed amendment to the Scotland Bill to create a statutory right to attend Council meetings when devolved matters are being discussed would simply give the Scottish Government parity with similar Administrations across the EU?

I am delighted to be speaking in this debate on the Scottish Government’s motion that Scottish Government ministers be routinely included in the UK delegation attending proceedings of an EU institution where devolved matters are being discussed, including—most significantly—meetings of the EU Council of Ministers. That will certainly be an improvement on the current situation, in which a written request has to be lodged with Whitehall. That request might be declined—and, as the cabinet secretary highlighted in her remarks, often is. Having spent five years at the European Parliament in Brussels and now as a member of the European and External Relations Committee and EU reporter for the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee I have absolutely no doubt that this is an important step forward in strengthening the representation of Scotland’s interests in Europe. Indeed, I would go further and suggest that such a move will greatly enhance the Parliament’s authority with regard to EU legislative and policy decisions that impact on our devolved competencies. We should never forget that when the EU legislates it does not reduce the powers of Government; instead, it diminishes the legislative power of Parliaments. Where EU legislation affects devolved matters this Parliament loses power and yet as matters stand we cannot ensure that a minister from this Parliament attends those meetings. That means that we as a Parliament have no one whom we can hold to account for laws and policies that are agreed on and, as a result, I urge colleagues to regard the motion under consideration first and foremost as a mechanism to protect the Parliament’s legislative prerogatives and duty of accountability. What is being sought is agreement for Scottish ministers to attend meetings of EU institutions at which a devolved competence or function is under consideration. In my view, it simply cannot be correct that, if a policy that is under the competence of or is exercisable by this Parliament is under discussion by the EU, a Scottish minister must rely on an invitation from Whitehall to be able to attend. The EU is probably the most powerful regulatory authority in the world, with its influence extending well beyond the headline policy issues of agriculture, fisheries and structural funds with which we are familiar and all of which directly impact, of course, on our devolved competencies. Beyond those issues, EU legislation plays an increasing role in determining the regulatory environment in which Scotland’s industry, commerce and, increasingly, public sector operate. EU competencies extend into education, research and development, transport, the environment and justice and home affairs, each of which is devolved to this Parliament and all of which directly affect Scotland’s economy and society. The current situation is an anomaly that was created by devolution and now needs to be resolved. Before devolution, there were no constraints on the attendance of Scottish Office ministers at meetings of the EU Council of Ministers where matters of importance to Scotland were being discussed. Indeed, because of their expertise in the policy area under review and its significance to the people of Scotland, Scottish ministers routinely attended Council meetings and frequently led the UK delegation. As a result, the delegation was stronger.

I would like to make progress. As the responsibilities previously exercised by the Scottish Office now fall to this Parliament and Scotland’s devolved Government, it is the responsibility of Scottish Government ministers and members of this Parliament to ensure that Scotland’s interests in EU matters are fully and properly reflected in EU-level discussions. Nothing in what is being proposed will undermine the status or the authority of the UK Government in EU institutions or violate EU rules. As I said, since 1993 the EU treaties have permitted ministers from our devolved Governments not only to attend council meetings but to sign binding agreements on behalf of their member state, precisely because EU legislation impacted on policies for which they, rather than the national Government, are responsible. The motion simply seeks to ensure that the Scottish Government will enjoy the same access to EU discussions as comparable legislatures across the EU. Based on my experience in Brussels, the UK Government should be under a statutory obligation to include Scottish ministers in a UK delegation when EU legislative proposals that impact on the competences of this Parliament are being debated, and the Scotland Bill should be amended accordingly. Of course, ultimately Scotland’s voice will be fully represented in the EU only when it takes its seat at the top table as a fully independent member state. That would ensure that agreement on EU legislation was signed off by a Scottish minister at that table and not by someone else, somewhere else, on our behalf. That would be a much better place for Scotland to be than our having to depend on London remembering—or not—to put forward our case. Indeed, in a recent speech to the David Hume Institute, Sir John Grant, the former UK permanent representative to the EU, made clear the benefits of being a full member state inside the EU when he said: “In Brussels, a nation (and Scotland is indubitably a nation) is either a Member State or a region. If it is a Member State, it has a seat at the table not just in Ministerial meetings, but in all the preparatory work in the myriad working groups that deal with the mass of business that makes up the EU’s regulatory role. It has an Ambassador, a seat at the European Council, and, crucially, a Commissioner, able to represent its interests within the Commission. As a region, it has none of these things. It is about as binary as it gets.” In the meantime, we must ensure that Scotland is properly represented in EU negotiations within the constraints of the current constitutional settlement. I hope that the Parliament will give its full support to the Government’s motion.

I am delighted that my first members’ business debate in the Parliament is on a topic that is so ingrained in the south of Scotland. I thank the members who signed my motion and who are taking part in the debate. I greatly appreciate their interest. It is clear that they recognise the vital importance of the food and drink sector, not just in the south of Scotland but throughout the country. Scottish food and drink fortnight is under way and we are halfway through flavour fortnight in Dumfries and Galloway. The annual celebration of Scottish produce encourages consumers to discover, buy and enjoy the local food and drink that is produced on their doorsteps and builds Scotland’s reputation as a land of food and drink. It is fantastic that so many places are embracing the enthusiastic promotion of high-quality Scottish produce. We have lots to be proud of when it comes to the food and drink sector in Scotland. During his statement to the Parliament yesterday, the First Minister said: “Our food and drink sector and our farming and fisheries are a key part of what Scotland offers to the world. In June 2010, Scottish food exports broke the £1 billion barrier for the first time.”—[Official Report, 7 September 2011; c 1373.] I think that we can all agree that that is great news for Scotland and for our economy. The Scottish Government’s national food and drink policy shows the understanding of the sector’s importance to Scotland that the Scottish National Party Government had from the outset. Yesterday the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment published new figures, which show an increase in the sector’s turnover to £11.9 billion. Retail sales of Scottish brands in England, Scotland and Wales rose by 30 per cent or £425 million between May 2007 and May 2010, and Scotch beef sales in Scotland alone increased by 21 per cent. Those are fantastic figures, which represent a great story for Scotland to tell, but there is more that we can do to promote the food and drink industry in Scotland, at home and further afield. The ever-increasing network of farmers markets and farm shops and events such as the flavour fortnight events across Dumfries and Galloway show how people’s attitudes have changed. People want to know where their produce comes from and engage with the source. We need to support and encourage that. Food is a critical element of Dumfries and Galloway’s tourism experience. Flavour fortnight, with its 92 events, demonstrates that the sector is growing and positions Dumfries and Galloway at the forefront of that growth. The hard efforts of savour the flavours of Dumfries and Galloway, the Wigtownshire food forum and Flavours of Galloway in promoting local food and drink excellence across Dumfries and Galloway and working with producers to find wider markets are to be commended. As part of flavour fortnight a diverse and broad range of unusual and unique events are taking place across the region, which are giving local people and visitors the opportunity to see things that they would not normally see. Producers are opening their doors, farmers markets are putting on special demonstrations and hotels and restaurants are offering menus that highlight local produce. One of the members, Sulwath Brewers, to which I was delighted to take the cabinet secretary in April, has even developed a new real ale especially for flavour fortnight, called Flavour Fortnight FestivAle. The rural element is key not only to the event but to the broader debate on promoting Scotland’s food and drink heritage and future. The wider broadband infrastructure discussion is one that is frequently raised in this Parliament and I have no doubt that it will feature heavily in the future. With so many people turning to the internet to place orders, we must provide the appropriate support to our suppliers, farmers and producers to enable them to keep up with the demand. I fully support the south of Scotland next generation broadband project, which is vitally important to enabling our rural businesses to compete on a level playing field with the rest of Scotland and beyond. Similarly, the issue of extremely high fuel prices in rural areas is a factor in the industry not realising its full potential. Another key issue that the cabinet secretary will be aware of is that of European Union protected food status schemes, which can help our producers to protect their famous Scottish foods. However, of the 520 currently registered protected designations of origin products, 143 are from Italy; 80 are from Spain; 68 are from Greece; 82 are from France; 58 are from Portugal; and just 16 are from the United Kingdom. Of those, the identifiable Scottish ones are Shetland lamb, Orkney beef and Orkney lamb. Out of the current 80 applications for PDOs, only three are from the UK, with none from Scotland. Although progress has been made, I believe that there is still more to do, especially in terms of raising awareness of the PDO scheme and ensuring that there is support for efforts to have products included in it. I am sure that there are many local products in Dumfries and Galloway that could benefit from having such a protected status, such as Galloway beef, which I mentioned to Alyn Smith MEP when I was in Brussels last week. Looking to the future of Scotland’s food and drink industry, I have been greatly impressed with the work in Ireland to promote food trails, which form an impressive network of routes throughout Irish towns and cities whereby producers, retailers and suppliers work together to promote quality produce. Each trail is local to the area but is promoted nationally. The network is fast becoming a big attraction for locals and visitors. The trails provide a fantastic way to see the country and support the local economy at the same time, and I would be keen for similar initiatives to spread across Scotland. We have an industry that is keen to pursue that approach, and I look forward to working with partnerships across the south of Scotland to get such an initiative up and running. I hope that other MSPs who are here today will be encouraged to do the same. Every region of Scotland has an active food and drink sector, therefore it is imperative that all organisations, large and small, are encouraged to work together in the same direction and with the same goal: to ensure that Scotland is the number 1 food destination.

10. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made to support the promotion of local food and drink produce from the south of Scotland. (S4O-00081)

Given the work that has been done by organisations such as Savour the Flavours, south of Scotland and Borders food forum and the Wigtownshire food forum, does the cabinet secretary agree on the importance of ensuring that our food and drink strategy is joined up with our tourism strategy and on the economic benefits that will arise for many of our small businesses from the development of real food tourism, such as food trails?

I welcome the opportunity to participate in this debate. In my speech, I will focus on Scotland’s relations with the EU and how they must, given the important negotiations that lie ahead, be strengthened. It goes without saying that a wide range of EU laws, regulations and policies have very important consequences for Scotland, and impinge directly on the Parliament’s devolved competences including, for example, agriculture and fishing, energy and climate change, research and development, and justice. It is therefore essential that the views of the Scottish Government and this Parliament be properly represented at all stages of the EU legislative process: consultation, negotiation and legislative scrutiny. In that context, I welcome the provision in the Lisbon treaty that national and regional parliaments are to engage with member state Parliaments to ensure that EU legislation that impacts on devolved matters does not violate the subsidiarity principle. As a member of the European and External Relations Committee and as the EU reporter for the Rural Affairs and Environment Committee, I look forward to participating fully in that new subsidiarity procedure. However, Scotland's legitimate EU interests are represented not only through this Parliament; the principal responsibility in that endeavour falls to the Scottish Government. Currently, in formulating its negotiating position on EU legislative proposals, the UK Government is obliged to consult the Scottish Government. However, it is under no obligation to adjust its position in the light of that consultation, regardless of the importance to Scotland of the issue under discussion. Moreover, when the UK Government enters into policy negotiations in Brussels, Scottish Government ministers have no right to attend or to participate in those discussions, even if—once again—the issue is centrally important to Scotland. That is no longer acceptable and I will demonstrate why. When, next week, the European Commission unveils its proposals for the shape of the EU budget for 2014 to 2020 it will, in effect, fire the starting gun for the debate on the future shape of all EU spending policies, many of which are of key importance to Scotland. One such policy is the common agricultural policy, further reform of which will be one of the key debates over the next two years. Unless Scottish ministers are fully involved in the entire process, particularly in debates in the Council of Ministers on agriculture, our farming and wider rural interests stand to suffer significantly. The UK Government’s approach to the EU budget talks is to secure a real reduction in EU spending. To that end, it wishes to phase out direct payments to farmers under the current CAP pillar 1 and to reduce spending under pillar 2. If agreed, those reforms will do considerable damage to Scotland’s farmers and food-related sectors and will significantly undermine the economic wellbeing of our fragile rural communities, including in the south of Scotland. In fact, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and Environment made that very point yesterday. That example alone highlights the defects in the current arrangements and shows why, when matters of such crucial importance to our industries and communities are being considered, it is essential that Scottish Government ministers be able by right to attend and contribute to discussions in the EU Council of Ministers. Since 2007, the SNP Government has attached considerable importance to our EU engagement. In that regard, it has set out four key priorities—energy and climate change; marine environment; research and creativity; and freedom, justice and security—and I know that ministers have worked constructively with the UK Government on delivering some of the many successes that since then have been achieved in those areas. However, in the light of the respect agenda, the time has now come for the Scottish Government's participation in that relationship to be enhanced. The Scottish Government is seeking the Parliament’s support for the Scotland Bill to be amended to give Scotland a statutory right for Scottish ministers to attend EU council meetings where discussions touch on devolved responsibilities, and a right to speak for the UK where Scottish interests predominate. It is absolutely vital for Scotland to be at the heart of the crucial negotiations that lie ahead on reforming the common agricultural policy, the common fisheries policy, future EU structural funds and future research and innovation policies, all of which will have significant implications for Scotland. In working together with our partners in both the Council and the European Parliament, Scotland needs as strong a voice as possible at that negotiating table. It will come as no surprise to anyone that I believe that only as a fully independent member state within the European Union will Scotland have real influence and a real voice in ensuring that its EU policy interests are properly represented. Having spent five years working in the European Parliament in Brussels, I assure members that I never once encountered a colleague from one of the many smaller EU member states who thought that they would be better off allowing one of the larger member states to speak on their behalf. In an EU of member states there is simply no substitute for being at the top table—and that is where Scotland belongs. Until then, however, we must ensure that the arrangements for the devolved Scottish Government are such that Scotland’s legitimate interests are represented in EU negotiations as part of the UK delegation. I sincerely hope that in the debates to come on the Scotland Bill this Government gets the support of the entire Parliament in that endeavour.

I welcome the opportunity to participate in this morning’s debate. The future of our higher education institutions is of considerable importance to my constituents throughout the south of Scotland. One of our flagship higher education institutions in the south-west is the Crichton campus in Dumfries. I wish to use the debate as an opportunity to highlight the very special significance of the Crichton campus for the future prosperity of the entire region. In 2007, the newly elected SNP Government fulfilled its pledge to save the Crichton by providing additional funding. Since then, and with the support of the SNP Government, the Crichton has evolved as a dynamic and innovative model of academic collaboration, which has been to the benefit of its students and the economy of the south-west of Scotland as a whole. I congratulate everyone involved in making the Crichton campus a success. The further development of the Crichton campus should be a priority not only for the academic partners involved but for all those who, like me, want the wider regional economy of the south-west to grow and prosper. It is incontrovertibly the case, I believe, that the presence of higher education and university facilities such as the Crichton can and does play a decisive role in raising the rate of economic growth and improving economic opportunities across an entire region. As the principal higher education cluster in the south of Scotland, the Crichton campus is a crucial resource for equipping the young people of the area with the skills that they need to find employment. The overall regional contribution that is made by the Crichton campus extends well beyond its immediate role as an educator. Equally significant is the contribution that it makes across the south as an emerging centre of excellence for research and innovation activities. It is widely recognised that virtually all successful regional economies have at their centre a cluster of knowledge-intensive activities based around and driven by successful higher educational institutions. I want the Crichton campus to continue to develop as the regional knowledge-intensive cluster in the south of Scotland, and to act as a magnet attracting more inward investment to the region. The Crichton academic partnership is well placed to realise that potential, given the right vision and commitment. The landscape of research funding for our universities is changing. There is a growing awareness that basic research needs to be augmented by actions that improve the dissemination of research results across industry and encourage firms, particularly small to medium-sized enterprises, to innovate in new technologies—and to enhance their competitiveness by so doing. Nowhere is that trend more apparent than in the EU research funding that is targeted at the university sector. I fully expect the next EU research framework programme, FP8, to assign substantial funding to actions that target later stages in the innovation chain than the fundamental science-based research for which many of our older universities have global reputations. It is in that broad area of research and innovation activity that the Crichton has considerable potential to contribute to the local and regional economies of the south of Scotland. I congratulate the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning on the considerable work that he has done to ensure that Scotland’s interests in the development of the EU eighth framework programme are being fully represented to the European Commission very early in the Brussels policy process. I encourage all the partners at the Crichton campus, along with the local authorities, Scottish Enterprise, the Federation of Small Businesses and the wider SME population, to develop a range of activities focused on the dissemination of research and innovation in partnership with local firms, and not only in the subject areas that are already represented on the campus; they should also develop new subject specialisms and new partnerships, which will be of benefit to the entire economy of the south of Scotland. I will be only too pleased to support those partners in that endeavour, and I urge them to consider EU research and development programmes as a possible source of funding. The University of Glasgow is currently reviewing the continued provision of the liberal arts degree in particular, and the related provision of liberal arts courses in general, at the Crichton campus. Axing the successful liberal arts degree programme could significantly reduce the educational choices that are available to students wishing to attend the Crichton at a time when demand is rising. It could also remove one of the few degree programmes in Scotland that is truly interdisciplinary in approach and content and which, as a result, provides students with a range of transferable skills that they can take to the labour market. I have already written to the cabinet secretary setting out the concerns of my constituents, and I copied the letter to Professor Muscatelli. I hope that the university court will take those concerns on board when it meets on 22 June.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his assurances—the Crichton should provide for liberal arts courses, particularly at postgraduate research level. Universities are central to national and local economic development. The Crichton is central to boosting the growth, improving the employment opportunities, and increasing the resilience of the economy of the south-west of Scotland. Since 2007, the SNP Government has demonstrated its support for the Crichton. I have a positive vision for the Crichton and I pledge my support to the staff, students and each of the institutions that are represented on the campus as they develop their strategies and seek out new sources of funding that will assist them in developing the research and innovation programmes that will contribute to the growth of the campus itself and contribute considerably to the wider economy of the south of Scotland.

It is an immense privilege for me to make my first speech in this Parliament as a list member for South Scotland. In representing that area, I am following in the footsteps of Alasdair Morgan, who retired from front-line politics at the recent election. I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the many years of outstanding public service that Alasdair gave to the south-west of Scotland as an MP and as an MSP and also to this Parliament, where he served with distinction as Deputy Presiding Officer. [Applause.] Like others, I welcome this debate on Scotland’s economy and the statement from the cabinet secretary that set out the Government’s core priorities for economic recovery and job creation. This debate has considerable importance for the south of Scotland. Like every other part of the country, the south of Scotland has been badly affected by the economic downturn that has resulted from the deflationary policies that have been imposed on Scotland by the Tory-Liberal coalition in London. Against that backdrop, the policies of the SNP Government to support our rural economies represent a bold and innovative approach that is aimed at creating new jobs and delivering sustainable growth across the south of Scotland. The record of this Government in supporting Scotland’s rural economy is exemplary. I could draw on many examples from the south-west of Scotland, where SNP policies on farming, fishing, the environment and renewables have supported our rural economies to expand and exploit new opportunities. However, I think that we all agree that a large part of the future prosperity and sustainability of the economies of rural Scotland will depend on the success of our small business sector. As the cabinet secretary said earlier, our small businesses remain the heartbeat of our economy, and I will focus my remarks on them. Some of the measures that support small businesses apply across the country, such as the small business bonus scheme, which has taken 64,000 small businesses out of the rates system altogether—saving them up to £4,100 a year—and has given substantial reductions to tens of thousands of others. The Government is committed to maintaining the scheme for the next five years, and I can assure members that that commitment is welcomed by the many small businesses that I have visited across Galloway. Other policies have significantly improved the prospects for our small businesses in specific sectors that are of key importance to the south of Scotland. In particular, the food and drink sector, tourism, the creative industries and the renewable energy sector are all areas in which the SNP Government's policies over the past four years have supported the growth of new and existing companies, many of which have acquired a global reputation for supplying world-class products. Over the next five years, the Government will provide further direct support to help the small businesses in all of those sectors in the south of Scotland to grow and create new jobs through our small business jobs plan. That will support small businesses that are looking to take on their first employees and apprentices and will assist them to gain access to the finance that they need to expand their operations. It will also involve assisting our rural producers to position their products higher up the value-added chain. I particularly welcome the £50 million digital connectivity initiative that the Government will introduce and which will roll out superfast broadband to rural Scotland. That will be a crucial element in improving the economic opportunities for enterprises that are located in the south of Scotland. Indeed, I believe that it will act as a magnet to bring new firms, and therefore jobs, to the region. In particular, enhanced digital connectivity will greatly increase the likelihood that more of the research and development activity that often becomes the key driver of sustained economic growth will be attracted to locate in the south. Equally important is improving our rural small businesses’ access to new markets, especially those overseas, and I have already noted the growing international reputation of many firms in the south of Scotland. This Government’s commitment to supporting the development of new export markets will be immensely important to many small firms across the south, particularly those in Galloway that are involved in the tourism, food and drink, and creative arts sectors. The Government’s rural agenda for the next five years, which has been enthusiastically received across the south of Scotland, offers a framework within which enterprise can flourish and new and lasting jobs can be created. However, it raises the question whether we could achieve more. I believe that we could, both in the south of Scotland and in the whole country, if we had access to a wider range of economic policy levers. A simple example will illustrate the general point: as a direct consequence of the UK Government’s decisions, and despite our request for a fair fuel duty, fuel prices in the south of Scotland are among the highest in the country. If this Parliament had the power to set fuel duty, we would be able to address a problem that not only is economic but has a much wider social cost for many of the elderly and disadvantaged for whom transport is an essential part of daily life. A similar argument can be made with regard to our demand for control over corporation tax and the Crown estate and for having a greater say over European policy. Although I look on the next five years as a privileged opportunity to implement with others the Government’s policies in the south of Scotland, I must end with a plea that, in the debates to come on the economic powers that the Parliament should have, we recognise that such powers are being sought not for their own sake but because they are essential in addressing the needs of Scotland’s economy and fulfilling our people’s aspirations.