As a member of the cross-party group on Tibet, I am keen to contribute to this important debate on the subject of self-immolation by those who protest against the questionable human rights record of China in the region. I thank Maureen Watt for securing parliamentary time to consider the significant issues that are raised in the motion. I acknowledge her long-standing record of campaigning on human rights breaching, which she should be rightly proud of—[Interruption.] I am sorry, but I have forgotten my written speech and am doing it from my phone. I ask members to bear with me. Through my work with the group, I have become increasingly aware of the practice of self-immolation. I understand that 127 instances of self-immolation have been recorded in Tibet since 2009. In many cases, this form of protest is fatal, and it illustrates the increasing desperation of Tibetans, who have suffered extreme oppression at the hands of the Chinese Government. Perhaps most concerning are the efforts of authorities in the region to conceal the true number of recorded self-immolations, so that the world cannot comprehend the scale of unrest in Tibet. International observation tells us that restrictions on freedom of religion, degradation of water sources and a curtailment of media reporting are just some of the issues that the Tibetans face. As Maureen Watt said, it has been reported that family members of those who have self-immolated face criminal charges through their association and that even witnesses to the events can face serious punishment from the Chinese authorities. It is clear that there is an emerging international consensus to improve the lives of those living in Tibet and to hold China to account for its human rights record in the region. It is only through a greater understanding of the events that are taking place in Tibet that we will be able to build a coalition of resistance against oppression and state interference in the lives of those living there. I acknowledge the excellent work that has been carried out by the Scottish centre for Himalayan research at the University of Aberdeen and the Tibet support group Grampian to highlight the extraordinary human rights abuses that often go unnoticed in the region. Work such as that will be instrumental in highlighting the daily struggles of Tibetans and can be part of the wider efforts to bring about a sustainable solution to the continuing abuses of the Tibetan population by the Chinese authorities. I thank Maureen Watt again for bringing the issue to the Parliament and I apologise again for reading my speech from my phone and not my paper copy.

I am especially pleased to participate in the debate, as I am a member of the Public Petitions Committee that produced the report on tackling child sexual exploitation. As fellow members of the committee are well aware, it took more than 10 months of evidence taking to produce the report, the origins of which can be traced away back to July 2011, when the committee received a petition from Barnardo’s Scotland calling for new research into the nature and scope of child sexual exploitation in Scotland and new Scottish Government guidelines to combat that problem. On hearing initial and preliminary evidence—together with evidence from the Minister for Children and Young People, Aileen Campbell—members of the committee all felt that it was essential that an inquiry into the issues surrounding child sexual exploitation be undertaken. At the onset of the inquiry, committee members became aware that a number of other agencies had initiated working groups to investigate child sexual exploitation. It was important that we did not duplicate that work or overlap that activity but instead complemented and enhanced each investigation by setting clear terms, which we did. That enabled us to come up with 28 recommendations. Having set the scene, I will turn my attention to the findings of the committee with regard to tackling child sexual exploitation in Scotland. In particular, I will focus on three areas in the report: the nature and extent of child sexual exploitation in Scotland, the vulnerabilities of young people, and the socialisation of young people with special regard to early intervention. On the nature and extent of child sexual exploitation in Scotland, the committee found that, although the current definition of child sexual exploitation was deemed to be helpful by individuals and agencies and was seen as particularly important with regard to raising awareness and understanding of the issue, there were some reservations about it. The committee made a number of recommendations in that regard, which included the Scottish Government giving high priority to ensuring that high quality data collection tools that would supply vital information on the prevalence and nature of CSE in Scotland could be identified, standardised, and rolled out across Scotland. Such an approach will provide information that is necessary to inform a co-ordinated strategy for tackling and preventing child sexual exploitation and supporting victims. We would not need to start from scratch: the committee heard from Sheila Taylor MBE and Cheryl Stevens of the national working group for sexually exploited children and young people, and from the Forth valley child protection committee pilot study, both of which groups have existing data collection tools. On the issue of the vulnerabilities of young people, it would be true to say that all children and young people are vulnerable to some extent, no matter how well they are nurtured and supported by their family and schools. However, within Scottish society, there is a group of children and young people who are particularly vulnerable: those who are in the care system. As a consequence, it is of particular importance that the committee’s recommendations with regard to children and young people in the care system are taken forward as a high priority. On the issue of socialisation, as a mother of three children—two of whom are teenagers and the third of whom is in primary school—I cannot emphasise enough the vital role that education programmes can play in making children aware of the dangers and pitfalls that exist, especially in this era of instant global communication. As other members have noted, the use and misuse of social networking is a hugely worrying concern and is an issue that should be tackled. That is why there is a need for the Scottish Government to address the committee’s recommendations around the socialisation of young people and early intervention. I wish to draw the chamber’s attention to the vital role that education in its broadest sense—I include training in this regard—can play in tackling and preventing child sexual exploitation and supporting the victims. I cannot overstate the importance of the committee’s overarching recommendation, which is that the Scottish Government should develop a national strategy for tackling child sexual exploitation. Such a national strategy would provide a framework for a co-ordinated national approach, which would have a tripartite goal of tackling CSE, preventing CSE and supporting victims of CSE. Only by having such an approach can the issues that I highlighted be addressed, which would enable us to create a society that has at its core the wellbeing of its children and young people and the aim of protecting them from the scourge of child sexual exploitation.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to improve the rehabilitation of young offenders in their communities after short custodial sentences. (S4O-02807)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that key events in an offender’s life, including their reintegration into the local community, impact on the person’s motivation not to reoffend. A highly individualised process is required if reintegration is to be effective. Given that, what practical measures is the Government taking—now and for the future—and how will their impact be measured?

As a member of the City of Edinburgh Council (Leith Links and Surplus Fire Fund) Bill Committee, I am pleased to contribute briefly to the debate, which deals with an issue that I am sure is of importance to the local community. In my role as a member of the committee, I have gained a valuable insight into an important and historical local issue that necessitates full consultation prior to any recommendation being made. I feel that the debate has illustrated the vital role that Leith Links has played in the life of the local community, and I believe that everyone who has an interest in the area should be consulted before any decision is made. That is why I have very much enjoyed being a member of the committee and, in particular, the opportunity that it has given me to visit what, for local residents, is an important site. I am happy to support the installation of the John Rattray statue, especially as the local community has been involved in a consultation process on issues such as the potential effects on the local area of tourism as a result of people visiting the site of the statue, once it has been installed. I am particularly pleased to note that the proposed artwork highlights the valuable role that public consultation has played in this Leith-based initiative. [Interruption.]

The consultation process afforded the opportunity to seek guidance from Police Scotland, which, following its viewing of the initial plans, indicated that the site was vulnerable and that “consideration should be given to installing public space monitoring CCTV or other measures” to ensure that it would be safe and secure. The committee was informed that such concerns had been taken into account and that the plans had been changed to lessen such risks, but it is important that consideration should be given to ensuring that any statue that is installed on the site meets all the necessary requirements for safe installation, including on-going health and safety requirements. I am pleased to support the initiative for which the bill provides, which will provide an additional structure that will enhance the landscape of the local area, and I thank the committee’s convener, John Lamont, for his outstanding patience and guidance, and the committee clerk, Claire Menzies Smith, for her patience and guidance.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what additional measures it has put in place to support teachers in light of recent concerns expressed by Educational Institute of Scotland members regarding the introduction of national 4 and 5 exams. (S4O-02805)

Does the minister intend to delay the system’s introduction?

I am delighted to participate in tonight’s members’ business debate on the throughcare support project at HMP Greenock. I thank Jackson Carlaw for stepping up to the plate and enabling the debate to go ahead, and I wish Annabel Goldie a speedy recovery. As members will be aware, I have a professional interest and experience in youth and adult offender education. In my position in social work in Glasgow, I witnessed the vital role that education can and does play in assisting offenders to rehabilitate themselves in their local community and in providing them with a means to gain meaningful employment after release. I want to focus on two things: the pilot throughcare support project in HMP Greenock and some of the comments that have been attributed to Lord Carloway. Turning first to the throughcare project, it is plain that the figures speak for themselves. The Scottish Prison Service has invested some £70,000 in taking forward the initiative. Those are moneys well spent, particularly when one considers that reoffending costs the Scottish economy £3 billion per year. Given that in 2009-10 more than 47,000 Scots were convicted of a criminal offence; that 30 per cent of those individuals were reconvicted within a year; and that one in five offenders in Scotland has 10 or more previous convictions, we need the kind of initiatives that are promoted within HMP Greenock, with their strong emphasis on training and education. I understand that the scheme’s benefits are secured by the team of throughcare support officers to whom Jackson Carlaw referred, who assist offenders leaving custody in accessing services such as housing, benefits and addiction support. That approach, along with interagency working in communities, can provide both pre-release and post-release support to not just prisoners but their families and the wider community. In recent days, Lord Carloway, the Lord Justice Clerk, has suggested that Scotland’s prison population is too high and that the wrong people are too often placed behind bars. He has also argued that prison sentencing should shift from a culture of retribution to one that takes greater account of the impact on inmates and wider society and stated that agencies should look at models in Scandinavia where prison populations have been significantly reduced. Last year, Sweden, which is known for its emphasis on rehabilitation and liberal approaches to sentencing, announced plans to close four of its prisons because of a significant fall in the prison population. In that country, reoffending is roughly half that of Scotland’s. Perhaps that example provides us with one more reason why it is important for initiatives such as HMP Greenock’s throughcare project to be undertaken and properly evaluated to assess their impact on offenders and rates of offending and reoffending. Educational initiatives such as the throughcare project are vital as we strive to battle the problem of reoffending, and I look forward with interest to the publication of the evaluation of the project’s first operational year, which I believe is expected in the spring. I am especially interested in understanding more about how the project actually worked in practice and offenders’ opinions about its success. In Scotland, we need a culture shift in our sentencing of offenders to ensure that rehabilitation and restorative justice are prioritised over the futile and counterproductive short sentences that we have become used to. I believe that such projects are the first step in realising that prison should be more than punishment and that they will provide compelling evidence to inform our future approaches to criminal justice.

I congratulate the Finance Committee on its comprehensive report, and I thank the clerks who put it together. In my speech tonight, I represent the interests of my constituents across Glasgow and my colleagues in local government. This budget could have addressed the most dire economic circumstances that we have faced for a generation. Local authorities are the very last line of defence against Westminster austerity and Holyrood point scoring, using their scarce resources to mitigate the worst excesses of both. However, the budget limits the power to provide any real form of relief for disabled people, those on low incomes and those who are most reliant on public services—the most vulnerable in our society. The biggest challenge that local authorities in Scotland face concerns their ability to continue to serve their communities in the face of the underfunded council tax freeze. Our councils are forced to raise funds in other ways, and have done so principally through increasing the charges for the non-statutory services that they provide, which are services that are often relied on by those who are most in need. I have been contacted by a number of constituents and local organisations, who tell me that the financial settlements from the Scottish Government are really beginning to affect them personally. They say that local services are facing increased demands and higher costs, leading to far more pressures being placed on the vulnerable groups and those with additional support needs.

If the council tax freeze were not underfunded, I am sure that we could fund both things. The harsh reality is that the council tax freeze disproportionately benefits the rich, while an increased reliance by local authorities on council charges disproportionately affects those who are most in need. Those families who are most likely to rely on council services lose out, while people who own the most expensive properties reap the biggest rewards. The cumulative benefit of the council tax freeze to a band H home owner by 2013 is more than £1,500, in contrast to the cumulative benefit to a band A home owner of only £250.

I most certainly was not saying that they are all rich. For too many families, this Christmas will be a modest affair, with the tragic choice between heating and eating once again being contemplated. More families are in this situation than was the case at this time last year because of the huge number of public sector redundancies that have been necessary in order to meet yet more budget cuts. Last month’s Audit Scotland report on Scotland’s public sector workforce concluded that there were 26,600 fewer jobs—that is 26,600 households—in the public sector in March 2013 compared with March 2009, which amounts to an incredible 5 per cent of all jobs in our councils. That pattern of redundancy, poverty and hardship is unsustainable and much more must be done to make a real difference to the lives of those who are suffering the most. Although the Westminster Government is damaging our economy with its misplaced priorities, we can do so much more here in Scotland to mitigate the effects of its decisions. It is time to pursue a cross-party solution to the very real problems that Scots face in the new year. That means looking for solutions that exist now, not putting Scotland on pause.

I am very happy to contribute to Alex Johnstone’s members’ business debate on the Arbroath CAFE project. I am especially keen to take part in a debate to promote the value of a community project because I previously worked in community learning and development environments in both rural and urban locations across Scotland. In my view, the Arbroath CAFE project is a first-class example of community learning and development in action. This commendable social enterprise offers young people in Angus opportunities to participate in a variety of activities. I understand that the formal aspects of the provision include training for employment, health guidance and citizenship education. I am happy to note that the Arbroath CAFE project has achieved national and international recognition for its endeavours and achievements in providing a comprehensive alternative to alcohol and drug misuse and the subsequent involvement in criminal activities that can so easily result from that for some young people. The subject of developing programmes for alternatives to drug and alcohol misuse is close to my heart, as I have previously worked in that field in the voluntary and statutory sectors. I was fortunate enough to gain extremely valuable experience as an addiction counsellor in Glasgow. As a consequence, I am very aware of the challenges that workers in the field of alcohol and drug misuse face, especially when working with young people. I am aware that all those involved in supporting the Arbroath CAFE project have worked hard to seek the funding required to maintain the services that it provides for young people. They achieved their goal through generating donations, hosting fundraising events and sourcing various grants for which they were eligible. They should be commended for that task in itself. I take this opportunity to make a suggestion about utilising the experience of the Arbroath CAFE project. Again, I draw on my experience of working in community learning and development in both formal and informal settings. The Arbroath CAFE project brings together the two elements of community learning and development—youth work and adult education—in a supplementary and complementary fashion. In that way, it is an example of community development that would lend itself easily to a process of peer education, whereby the valuable experience and skills that have been gained through the Arbroath CAFE project could be disseminated to similar groups and organisations across Scotland. The project’s model could be replicated across the country through a peer-education approach that highlights it as a template of best practice.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what support it provides to people who have experienced miscarriage. (S4O-02646)

I thank the minister for that reply. Organisations such as Scottish Care and Information on Miscarriage have been supporting mothers in my region—Glasgow—since 1992 and have worked to identify and tackle the causes of miscarriage and stillbirth through expert research. Does the Scottish Government have any plans to review their level of funding or to assist them and similar charities in acquiring alternative funding streams?

I am keen to contribute to this important debate on the review of opioid replacement therapies in Scotland. In my region of Glasgow, the issue is of particular importance, as it affects thousands of families who are struggling with addiction and substance dependency issues. I am confident that members across the chamber will agree that opioid replacements such as methadone can, in particular circumstances, help to stabilise drug users and direct them away from the most harmful of illegal drugs. However, I am also confident that we could do much more to help addicts to dispose of their drug habit altogether through greater use of community recovery resources. I believe that, as a short-term solution, methadone can act as an effective intervention that removes the individual from dependency on other substances and the lifestyle associated with acquiring that. However, a longer-term strategy will need to address the social, economic and medical reasons behind the process of addiction to drugs such as ecstasy, cocaine and heroin. The most effective strategy will not just be medical but will reflect on the reasons why people become addicted and provide individuals with a route out of their addiction altogether. Fundamentally, that will mean tackling effectively problems such as poverty, unemployment, homelessness and crime. The harsh reality is that there is no one solution that will comprehensively eradicate the harm caused by drug addiction. Serious investment is required in a number of areas if we are to have a greater impact on the lives of those most affected. I welcome the findings of the review into opioid replacement therapies, which recommends that we attempt to prioritise recovery from addiction and aim to work more consistently with grass-roots agencies across the country. However, I would still like to see from the Scottish Government a timetable outlining the action being taken to provide clear and effective routes from addiction to recovery. Those who depend on the support of key agencies and services are not only the drug users themselves but their families and the wider community, all of whom are affected by the criminal behaviour that facilitates the traffic of drugs into Scotland. Having worked within the field of addiction for the past 20 years in various roles and projects, including latterly as a social work professional for Glasgow City Council, I know that drug treatment and testing orders can play an important role in helping to deal with drug-related crime—a point that is also highlighted in the report. However, my experience has taught me that we need to use DTTOs better as part of a joined-up system that supports addicts to overcome their addiction. Very often, drug treatment and testing orders are too little, too late and are handed down to individuals who are already well acquainted with a life of hard drugs and the criminal behaviour required to pay for them. We need to be smarter about when we intervene with drug users. In my view, intervention should be as early as possible. Our agencies should be working within local communities where drug dependency is known to be high, and they should be carrying out preventive work with young people in schools and youth centres. For established users, our systems need to be effective at helping those who combine a number of drugs as well as those who misuse alcohol on top of drugs. It is a mistake to oversimplify the problem by isolating substances and neglecting the pattern of abuse that, for too long, has ruined lives and families. We know that the number of drug deaths in Scotland is too high. I will work with the Scottish Government to tackle that tragic reality, and I commend the basic principles of the report on ORT. I urge the Government to look more widely at the issues that we face and to place an emphasis on the kind of preventive work that will result in Scotland becoming a cleaner and safer place to live for future generations.

As an MSP representing the large, diverse and multicultural region of Glasgow, I believe that it is part of my duty to tackle prejudice, intolerance and discrimination in all forms, not only because prejudice impacts on the lives of those who experience it, but because it holds us back as a nation. The passing of the bill will have both legal and symbolic significance for LGBT people and their families, who are often on the receiving end of prejudice and discrimination. As Ruth Davidson said in her eloquent speech, recent research tells us that one in four young people who identify as gay, lesbian or bisexual have seriously contemplated or attempted suicide. That figure is a disgrace in modern Scotland. I truly believe that by eliminating some remaining differences, we can remove the stigma that affects so many of our young people. As has been mentioned, access to civil partnerships was a huge, commendable step forward, but it ensured that a division between same-sex and mixed-sex couples carried on into the 21st century. I believe that opening up the institution of marriage would achieve true legal equality for the first time. I recognise that equality does not mean that we all have to be the same, but in my view it means sharing the institution of marriage with those who have suffered discrimination, oppression and persecution for centuries. I also believe that the principle of equality should be extended to heterosexual couples who would like their relationship to be recognised in a different way. I have argued that civil partnerships should be extended to mixed-sex couples who choose to celebrate their relationship in a civil or secular ceremony outside of traditional marriage. As a consequence of denying heterosexual people access to civil partnerships, we are, once again, segregating couples based on their sexual orientation. That is outdated and it is something that the bill should seek to remove fully from our society. I recognise that the proposal of same-sex marriage is challenging to many people of faith and to some of our religious organisations. I have Christian values and I understand the view that marriage is an institution specific to the relationship between one man and one woman. Although I do not share that view, I passionately believe that those who hold it should be free to express it. That is why I am reassured to note that no religious organisation will be forced to perform same-sex marriages against its will and that religious freedoms will be protected by the bill. Attitudes are changing. In Parliaments throughout the world, greater recognition for same-sex couples is high on the agenda. We should not be left behind on the issue and I look forward to being part of the Parliament that brought this long overdue legislation to the people of Scotland.

I congratulate Malcolm Chisholm, as other members have done, on bringing this debate to the Parliament, which is about furthering awareness of an issue of which many people in Scotland are perhaps not as aware as they should be. People might have heard of spina bifida, but many will not understand its causes and how it might be prevented. The Scottish Government began its report “Improving Maternal and Infant Nutrition: A Framework for Action” by saying: “The Scottish Government wants to ensure that all children have the best possible start to life”. I think that all members can agree on that. In the report, the Government recognised that the diet and nutritional health of the mother before conception and during pregnancy are a key factor in the health of the foetus. An individual’s socioeconomic status can be a determining factor in many issues to do with health. That is the case for pregnant mothers. The growing up in Scotland study survey found that 81 per cent of women who had a lower-level standard grade had taken folic acid when they were pregnant, compared with 96 per cent of the women who were educated to degree level. Some 81 per cent of women in the lowest income group had taken folic acid, compared with 97 per cent in the highest income group. The figures show that some children are already at a disadvantage when they are born into this world. In the same study it was found that only 48 per cent of women took folic acid prior to their pregnancy but 90 per cent took folic acid during their pregnancy. However, we should note that not all pregnancies are planned and that that could affect those figures. The Scottish Spina Bifida Association’s “Are you getting enough?” campaign highlights an issue that has been prevalent in Scotland for some time now. According to Eurocat—European surveillance of congenital anomalies—Scotland had a higher prevalence of neural tube defects in 2010 compared with other European nations. Although the national health service has produced guidelines to inform women about neural tube defects, over 50 per cent of sexually active women are not taking folic acid on a regular basis. However, it is thought that compliance with the NHS guidelines could see cases of neural tube defects reduced by up to 72 per cent. If we are to tackle this problem, we need to ensure that we give expectant mothers fair and equal treatment to ensure that each one’s child is born with the best possible chance in life. Although the taking of folic acid before and during pregnancy does not totally remove the risk of a child contracting spina bifida, it reduces the risk significantly. Dr Margo Whiteford, consultant and chair of the Scottish Spina Bifida Association, states: “It just reduces the risk, probably between two-thirds and three-quarters.” I reiterate how vitally important the Scottish Spina Bifida Association’s “Are you getting enough?” national folic acid awareness campaign is in drawing attention to the necessity for every woman who is planning to become pregnant or who is sexually active and might become pregnant to take folic acid as directed by their GP. I am pleased to note that Michael Matheson, the Scottish Government’s Minister for Public Health, has backed the campaign, which endorses the NHS guidelines.

I am pleased to contribute to this important debate on the Scottish Government’s play strategy and the wider efforts that are being made to ensure that Scotland is the best place in the world to grow up. I whole-heartedly agree with the Scottish Government that play is vital from the early ages and stages of a child’s life and that engaging in fun educational activity is hugely beneficial to the health and wellbeing of our youngest citizens. It is undeniable that encouraging our children to become active and interact with their peers is a core part of the educational journey that begins long before their introduction to primary school. Children learn to play before they learn to walk or talk, and it is our collective responsibility to ensure that their experiences are of good quality and are meaningful. Encouragement of play among children depends not on any single factor but on genuine investment in every area of a child’s life. Play should be a focus in formal and informal environments. It should be a priority in schools and in the home. Parents, teachers, health professionals and others should all play a role in the development of our children. It is down to us to ensure that our youngest generation has the resources to get the most out of its formative years. Programmes such as getting it right for every child and the named person scheme for looked-after young people are well intentioned and—if they are appropriately resourced—can be exceptional tools to increase the quality of life for Scotland’s young people. However, without adequate investment, they can only ever be commendable aspirations that make little difference to the lives of our most vulnerable children. To implement many of the policy initiatives fully, front-line workers—whether in the voluntary sector, education, social work or health—will need more time with each child and greater readily available resources to support the invaluable work that they carry out daily. I want those initiatives to be as successful as possible. The uncomfortable truth is that that requires serious investment in our schools, social work services and national health service alongside—which is most important—increased support for parents. I am confident that the whole Parliament joins me in aspiring to a reality in which all children have the same opportunity for play in their formative years and in which no young person suffers as a result of a lack of resources in their home life or their time at school. To achieve that, we must prioritise young people in Scotland and further invest in the services that make the most significant difference to our children and their biggest supporters.

This feels rather like the graveyard shift. I speak in the debate for a number of reasons. First, as nearly all members said, the 1974 act is almost 40 years old and, although it has undergone review, a major review is long overdue, particularly in relation to the provision of genuine learning and skills development opportunities for offenders. Secondly, in the years since the 1974 act was passed the world has changed, as have the rights of citizens, including those whom the courts have convicted of criminal offences. The 1974 act is no longer fit for purpose in 21st century society. Last but not least, from my experience of working in addiction, education, social work and particularly youth justice, I know that it is vital that we take an inclusive approach to targeting and supporting young people who are deemed at risk of reoffending and that we support young and adult offenders who are serving custodial sentences. I am sure that all members agree that early intervention is of paramount importance, especially for the identification and putting in place of measures to support those who are most at risk of developing offending behaviour. Key to that is improved learning and skills in later life. As has been shown in the Scottish Government’s document “Offender Learning: Options for Improvement”. “There is a growing recognition that investing resources to support vulnerable families is a key part of an effective anti-poverty strategy whose many benefits will include lower rates of youth offending.” I will turn my attention to young people in Scotland. Young people are Scotland’s biggest asset. It is in all our interests to ensure that they have encouragement and support so that they can make the transition to adulthood. However, Glasgow, the area that I represent, has been top of the local authority league of those who have the highest number of 16 to 18-year-olds in the justice system. The Scottish Prisons Commission noted that Scotland locks up a disproportionately high number of young people and, in addition to the financial cost, that has a social and economic impact on the lives of those young people. It is essential that education, learning and skills opportunities have a central role in striving to transform the future lives of those young people. I now turn my attention to the needs of adult offenders. Research has shown that the most pressing need is adult literacy and numeracy. A comprehensive approach must be adopted to overcome the literacy issue. If literacy is not a central goal it will prove to be a major barrier to an inclusive approach to offering education, learning and skills opportunities as part of the rehabilitation programme. I have merely signposted the need for offering education, learning and skills opportunities as an inclusive and necessary part of rehabilitation. However, at this point, I should say that all that does not necessarily need to be delivered through the usual route of sitting at a desk reading for two hours. It can be an opportunity for prisons to use sport, the gym, art, drama, mentoring, pro-social modelling and computing. Many of those activities are being used, but it would be of benefit if more were happening. The Cabinet Secretary for Justice is right to say that when people break the law, we are right to hold them to account for their offending behaviour through our justice system. However, if rehabilitation is to have any true meaning, it is vital that the modernisation and reform of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 incorporates provisions for genuine opportunities for offenders, so that they can develop their learning and skills acquisition and give them real tools that will help them to improve their lives after a custodial sentence, as well as the lives of their families and communities. Such approaches can offer people a route out of offending and give them a more productive and positive future, which I am sure we all seek. It would not be inaccurate to say that the emphasis has been on punishing people. Enabling them to move on in their lives and be productive by offering them effective support has rarely been given the same priority. If the Scottish Government is genuine about taking a truly innovative approach to the rehabilitation of offenders, it will ensure that opportunities to gain education and skills are central to what is offered to an offender while they serve a custodial sentence. It is clear that learning, education and skills opportunities can have a positive impact on reducing reoffending as the vast majority of offenders share a common profile. They come from deprived backgrounds, fail to engage at school, and leave with low levels of attainment and poor skills. That reduces the number of opportunities that are available to them and all too often leads them into a confirmed pattern of repeat offending that can carry on throughout their lives. Education, learning and skills opportunities can help to break that cycle by teaching new skills that can help offenders to change and develop a positive future for themselves and their families. I urge the Scottish Government to make education, learning and skills opportunities creative, meaningful, relevant and central to its modernisation and reform of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974.

I am happy to contribute to this discussion and thank Joan McAlpine for opening the debate. I also thank Fiona McLeod for gaining an allocation of the chamber’s time for her motion, and I wish her a speedy recovery. I also thank the group for coming along today, for being in the public gallery tonight and for their outstanding display. I am happy to participate for a number of reasons in the Parliament’s congratulations to Westerton garden suburb on celebrating its 100th anniversary. Westerton garden suburb borders the Glasgow region that I represent, and it is adjacent to the Drumchapel and Anniesland ward that I represented as a Glasgow councillor for many years. On a personal note, Westerton garden suburb is only a few streets away from where I reside with my family, so I could say that I am a neighbour and that I know the area well. In addition, I am pleased to note the historical background to the area that has become known as Westerton. I am especially pleased to note that it was the first garden suburb in Scotland. The aim in building it 100 years ago, in 1913, was to create high-quality and affordable housing for the working classes. I am sad to say that that is still every bit as necessary today as it was all those years ago. I am pleased to be able to note that the approach was co-operative. Under the chairmanship of Sir John Stirling Maxwell, there was the vision and drive to build country cottage-style housing, surrounded by open countryside, and to make Westerton for Glasgow working people. The purpose of transforming land that had a few scattered farms was to establish a community setting with housing for the working classes of Glasgow, and to provide social and cultural amenities that are essential if a community is to survive and that support it as it strives to grow. Such amenities included shops, schools, recreational and social facilities within a community setting. I am pleased to note today that Westerton has grown and expanded, with new estates, a purpose-built primary school and social amenities, such as its own bowling green, church and new hall, all of which support the increased population that now resides in the area. There is also outstanding nursery provision, and I feel obliged to say that I have an interest because one my friends works there. All that development centres on 31 houses that were built with the aim of establishing a garden suburb. It is true that we can and should learn from history, particularly about the design and support that are required to allow communities to thrive and develop and be places where people wish to live. I am pleased to wish my neighbours congratulations on becoming 100 years old and wish Westerton garden suburb every success for the next 100 years.

Corroboration is not only an important and unique feature of Scots criminal law, but a cornerstone of Scots law. The University of Strathclyde school of law professors John Blackie and Donald Nicolson have recently produced a research paper that studies the likely consequences of this profound change to the system of criminal justice in Scotland. They state: “Whether or not the corroboration requirement is ‘archaic’ or rather a reflection of ancient wisdom depends on whether its rationale remains persuasive in the context of the values, rules and practices of the contemporary Scottish criminal justice system and society more generally.” Furthermore, within a criminal justice setting it “is clear that a core justification for the corroboration requirement is the perceived unreliability of witnesses.” Also: “All forms of unreliable evidence are equally capable of causing wrongful acquittals as wrongful convictions.” Such arguments have been utilised by, for example, members of the judiciary, certain academics, legal practitioners’ organisations, some police organisations and the Scottish Human Rights Commission. Turning to the reasoning for abolition, “Lord Carloway and the Scottish Government did not question the historical rationale for the corroboration requirement.” Rather, their argument had three main points. First, “the requirement is not fit for purpose in being incomprehensible, inconsistent and ineffective”. Secondly, “it is disproportionately prejudicial to the interests of victims and the public”. Thirdly, “it is unnecessary because fact-finders can be trusted to evaluate accurately the strength and reliability of evidence free from legal regulation and because there exist a range of other protections against unjust convictions”. Those points have been welcomed and used by Government lawyers and by some police organisations, which have been joined by women’s groups, as mentioned earlier, in their campaign for change. The points that I have highlighted both for retention and abolition of the corroboration rule in Scottish criminal law cases are but the tip of the iceberg; if anything, they show the necessity of a referral to the Scottish Law Commission or a public inquiry. The debate over whether corroboration is an archaic requirement or an invaluable safeguard presents a false dilemma. We must focus on the tangible evidence from victims of crime and their support groups, and on the experience of our legal professionals from around the country. The proposal to abolish the corroboration requirement cannot be considered in isolation, but must be viewed in the context of the wider reform of the criminal justice system in Scotland.

Every member in the chamber is passionate about the rights and wellbeing of children and young people. I hope that the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill will prove to be a positive step in making Scotland the best possible place for children to grow up in. However, I am cautious about the named person proposal. I have spoken with a wide range of professionals from across the board on the subject and many of them share my concerns. First, becoming a named person is a huge responsibility for someone to take on. Those people need impeccable expertise and knowledge of their duties and responsibilities. We must ensure that adequate training is in place to enable them to do the job properly. The cost of the additional resources is also of great concern. Like several other agencies, COSLA only last week expressed its reservations about the accuracy of the projected cost of the bill. The unpredictability of the cost stems from the fact that it is dependent on the number of hours that individuals are expected to spend carrying out the role. We must also be aware that ensuring solid communication links between the professionals involved will also present significant challenges. There will need to be and should be a high level of co-operation between the relevant local authorities. That is possible, but it is difficult, and we must ensure that the proper systems are in place to make it possible. We must resolve serious issues with the practicality of the proposal before the bill is passed. Placing an unmanageable load on workers who are already under pressure could prove to be disastrous for children, families and their workers.

I am delighted to contribute to this debate on the important subject of families who are affected by alcohol-related issues. I commend Gordon MacDonald for securing time to congratulate Al-Anon Family Groups on its fantastic work to support families who are affected by alcoholism. As a former addiction counsellor with Glasgow Council on Alcohol, I understand the devastating impact that drug and alcohol dependencies can have not only on the individuals who are affected, but on their families and their communities. The reality is that there is no one-size-fits-all solution to dealing with the causes and consequences of alcohol abuse. Al-Anon hosts meetings and support groups across the UK to allow friends and families of those who abuse alcohol to share experiences and to work together to solve common problems. More than 800 support groups operate in the UK and Ireland, and 120 of them are based in Scotland. I know from experience that such work is vital in addressing many of the underlying causes of alcoholism, and that it brings communities together in the pursuit of shared goals. Social work services in each of our 32 local authorities rely on organisations such as Al-Anon to work in partnership with the public sector to make the best use of scarce resources in challenging economic circumstances. Al-Anon Family Groups has carried out its work for more than 60 years, but receives no external financial support from the Scottish Government or local authorities, as my colleague Gordon MacDonald mentioned. The organisation works in some of our most deprived communities and with some of the most vulnerable individuals in society. I thank Al-Anon Family Groups for its dedication to improving the lives of those who are struggling with alcohol-related issues and I commend the excellent and outstanding work that it carries out in Scotland and the rest of the UK to improve the lives of vulnerable individuals, their families and the wider community.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how it will ensure that people who care for stroke patients are given a carer’s assessment. (S4O-02385)

Recent studies have recognised that depression and a range of other mental health conditions are often consequences of stroke for stroke survivors and their carers. In light of that fact, will the minister advise the chamber of the progress that has been made in assisting the thousands of primary carers who are both suffering from and supporting others who are in significant psychological distress?

I welcome the opportunity to contribute to this stage 1 debate on the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill. First, I wish to highlight that how the referendum is seen in the eyes of the general public is paramount in the whole process of conducting it. I am pleased that the bill’s objective is to provide a truly democratic process. Bearing that in mind, the Parliament’s aim in scrutinising the bill is to ensure transparency and fairness. As a consequence, the referendum process must meet the two essential criteria of integrity and inclusiveness. The process must be conducted with integrity. By that, I mean that all the elements of the process, such as the campaigns and debates—no matter where they are held, whether in the Parliament or at the community level—must be transparent and informative. The process must also be inclusive and reach out to all individuals, groups and organisations across Scotland. If the referendum process does not meet those two essential criteria, it will not have the credibility that it requires in trying to achieve its aim of involving all sectors of Scottish society. Scotland is about to embark on a journey that will last just over 12 months. That journey will be of vital importance to every child, young person and adult in this country. The key elements that are essential to ensure a fair, just and credible referendum process are transparency, fairness in current spending limits, and the Electoral Commission having the requisite powers to monitor and take action against any breach of the rules. I cannot overestimate the importance of the role that those elements will play in ensuring that the referendum process is conducted with integrity and inclusiveness. It is vital that the rules in the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000 are strictly adhered to. Fairness and transparency are of the utmost importance in the process, and a level playing field must operate for all parties that are involved in the debate. It is essential that the rules that are set out in the bill are followed, and I fully trust that the Electoral Commission will ensure that. I reiterate my commitment to allowing 16 and 17-year-olds to vote not only in the referendum but at subsequent elections. I firmly believe that that will encourage teenagers to become active citizens who value democracy, if they are not already, and I hope that the measure will reinvigorate our politics. I remind the Government that it has a duty to govern for all the people of Scotland over the next 12 plus months and not to become preoccupied with the campaign. The referendum is Scotland’s referendum. It is not the SNP’s or the yes campaign’s referendum but everyone in Scotland’s referendum. I look forward to the debate.

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether it is meeting its targets to reduce air pollution. (S4O-02356)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that recent studies of the subway system in Glasgow have highlighted dangerously high levels of air pollution and a concentration of tiny metallic particles that is well in excess of recommended safety limits. In light of that discovery, what action has the Scottish Government taken to reduce levels of pollution and increase air quality for commuters in Glasgow?

The budget represents another significant real-terms reduction in the resource grant for local government. Will that not inevitably result in more job losses on top of the 37,000 jobs already lost under this Government?

I congratulate Alex Ferguson on securing today’s debate. I am pleased to hear that Dalbeattie high school will be involved in such an exciting challenge and wish them all the best with their endeavours. I, too, welcome our guests to the Scottish Parliament. I take this opportunity to mention the different learning styles that are available to not only children and young people, but adults living in communities across Scotland. Given my background and my degree qualification in community education, I will highlight the roles that community learning and development play in complementing the formal education sector through a community development approach. I set the scene by referring to the historical context and the origins and development of the formal education sector in Scotland. The formal school sector has long enjoyed an international reputation as part of one of the best educated societies in the world. That tradition is being advanced by Dalbeattie high school’s participation in the da Vinci challenge. The Education Act 1696, which was an act of the Parliament of Scotland, saw the establishment and development of schools that were open to all boys and girls, regardless of their status. It was not until the Education (Scotland) Act 1872 that schooling was made compulsory for children aged five to 13 years of age, which laid the basis of the modern education system. Why the history lesson? The openness of the education system in Scotland and the quality of provision have been the subjects of much myth making. Alex Fergusson’s motion shows what young people in Scotland can achieve if they are given the right support. In April, in my region, Glasgow City Council’s education service established the employability and skills partnership team, which helps young people in the city to access vocational education while they are at school. The introduction of comprehensive education, in legislation in 1965, improved access to education. An attempt was made to provide an adequate standard for all children in Scotland. Community learning and development can play a key role in not only complementing but supplementing the formal education sector. It is a way of working to support communities to increase the skills, confidence, networks and resources that they need if they are to tackle problems and grasp opportunities. In short, it is a distinct sector of education, alongside school and further and higher education. The application of the community development approach to the creation of learning opportunities can support: the identification of the local population’s educational needs; the planning of provision to meet and support those needs; the promotion of alternative programmes; and the monitoring and evaluation of the planned programmes. Those four points are taken from a paper that Ted Milburn—a former lecturer of mine, who became a professor of community education—delivered some 26 years ago. What Ted Milburn said more than a quarter of a century ago is more than relevant today. The community learning and development approach is important, not just in its ability to complement and supplement the formal education sector but as a way of taking forward social and economic initiatives, to tackle the poverty and social deprivation that are, unfortunately, still prevalent in too many communities in Scotland. We therefore need to share examples of good practice, such as the vocational training programme that Glasgow City Council is running and the initiative at Dalbeattie high school. We wish the pupils of Dalbeattie high school well in their endeavours; I hope that they will come back and tell us that they are champions.

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether the proposed procurement reform bill will seek to ensure that public sector contracts should be awarded only to companies that pay the living wage. (S4O-02266)

As the cabinet secretary has explained, the forthcoming procurement reform bill provides an opportunity to amend the Public Contracts (Scotland) Regulations 2012 to enable local authorities to promote payment of the living wage among organisations that are in receipt of public funding through local authority internal procurement processes. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that she has considered that proposal and that she will seek to include such an amendment within the delayed procurement reform bill?

I am delighted to contribute to this debate on the subject of the recently announced credit union expansion project. I congratulate John Wilson on securing time in the chamber to consider the positive effects of the project for people on low incomes. I welcome to the public gallery members from the Scottish Parliament cross-party group on credit unions and the director of the Association of British Credit Unions Ltd. ABCUL has been awarded a contract of £38 million to modernise and grow the credit union industry to discourage reliance on non-standard forms of credit such as payday loans. That is welcome news for families on low incomes right across the UK, who have for too long been subject to the exploitative business practices of payday lenders, who charge up to 6,000 per cent interest for short-term credit. The expansion will contribute to the continued revival of community credit unions and it is expected that Scotland will benefit significantly from the investment. It will enable local credit unions to offer a greater range of products to customers, which in turn will support our local economies. I welcome the announcement of the project and I strongly believe that the promotion of credit unions is the most effective means of discouraging vulnerable people from relying on payday loan companies at the end of each month. I am proud to support the aims of the debtbusters campaign in Glasgow, and I thank my colleague Kezia Dugdale for all the work that she has undertaken to highlight the long-term consequences of loan sharks operating in our local communities. The debtbusters campaign has illustrated the reality that companies offering payday loans have increased their market share by more than 400 per cent in the past three years. They now represent a significant presence on our high streets in towns and cities throughout Scotland, particularly Glasgow. It is right that action should be taken to provide an alternative to payday loan companies throughout the country, and I support the decision to promote credit unions as the natural alternative to an industry that has relied on the misfortune of families on low incomes for too long. Furthermore, I welcome Glasgow City Council’s recent decision to establish a credit union account with an initial deposit of £10 for every first-year pupil in the city. That is a long-term strategy that will help to educate young people about how to manage finances and encourage greater uptake of the services that credit unions offer, which are no longer limited to basic bank account facilities. Glasgow City Council’s refusal to let any of its commercial property to payday loan companies further illustrates Labour’s commitment to stopping the exploitation of vulnerable people and its determination to promote credit unions as a workable and realistic alternative on which local communities can rely. I encourage the Scottish Government to adopt that approach and invest in the Association of British Credit Unions so that the initiative can deliver real improvements in the services that credit unions offer throughout the country.

As a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, I am delighted to contribute to this debate on Scotland’s third national planning framework and to consider how best we ensure that planning contributes to wider economic recovery. I am keen for the third framework to build on the commendable principles that were contained in previous planning strategies, and I encourage the Scottish Government to be aspirational in confronting some of the biggest challenges that we are likely to face in the decades ahead. The Minister for Local Government and Planning, Derek Mackay, has stated that the key priority of NPF3 will be supporting sustainable economic growth. Like other members who have spoken in the debate, I feel that the Scottish Government’s focus on the phrase “sustainable economic growth” is somewhat ambiguous, as it is much less clearly defined than the previously used phrase, which was “sustainable development”, which already has a legal basis. I am sure that the Scottish Government wishes to be clear in its aims.

Well, we have all learned something new today. I would like to extend my support to the themes of supporting sustainable development and the transition to a low-carbon economy. I acknowledge the benefits that are brought to the overall strategy through the close working relationships that have been developed with VisitScotland, the Scottish Wildlife Trust, ClimateXChange and other key stakeholders throughout the consultation process. In such challenging economic circumstances, it is necessary that we prioritise infrastructure projects that will encourage tourism and inward investment in Scotland, thereby safeguarding jobs and promoting growth. I back the move to decarbonise our transport network and to improve key transport links between our cities. However, Parliament will be aware that the Scottish Government has already missed its targets for carbon reduction, with expert analysts predicting that every annual target from 2014 onwards will also be unachievable. Bearing it in mind that 40 per cent of emissions are from transport and housing, we can clearly see that the issue is an incredibly important aspect of the planning debate. That is why we need more than just hollow commitments from the Scottish Government on what it is able to deliver, and assurances about the resources that will enable the public and voluntary sectors to achieve the long term-aspirations in the national planning framework. I am, however, also concerned by suggestions that one in four of our high street stores will disappear over the coming years, as was stated last month in the “Retail Futures 2018” report from the Centre for Retail Research. We must look to our high streets and start the debate on how we can use the planning system to regenerate our town and city centres, in order to address the ever-changing face of our high streets. I am sure that the Minister for Local Government and Planning will be aware of that report and will acknowledge that the figure represents almost 5,800 individual stores, and probably more than 100,000 workers who will be made redundant if no effective intervention is put in place to speed up the recovery of our town centres. It is because of those facts that l urge the Scottish Government to ensure that it does not take a short-term view of the planning system, because that could have long-term consequences. I truly hope that the third framework will continue in the same vein as the previous planning strategies, and that the Scottish Government will listen to the concerns about the finer points of the strategies that have been placed before Parliament this afternoon.

I am delighted to contribute to this important debate on challenging negative racial and religious stereotypes and to add my congratulations to Amina—the Muslim Women’s Resource Centre. I welcome people from it to the chamber, including Faten Hameed, who is one of its directors. We are here to talk about the launch and success of the I speak for myself campaign. I thank my colleague Hanzala Malik for securing time in the chamber to talk about the important issues that have arisen from that campaign and to highlight the excellent work that is being carried out in the Glasgow region. Amina’s I speak for myself campaign is just one of many examples of what is great about the third sector in Scotland. Amina visited Scottish secondary schools to discuss Islam with pupils and recognised a problem. A staggering 70 per cent of the pupils to whom it spoke associated incredibly false and negative ideas with Muslim women. Amina identified that problem and immediately went about fixing it. We can all be proud of its campaign to challenge misconceptions about Muslim women by actively getting out and speaking to Muslim women about their experiences, identity and personal beliefs. Nil by Mouth is another excellent example of a charity that works hard to challenge negative religious stereotypes. On a budget of only £60,000, it delivered workshops to more than 5,000 people last year in my region of Glasgow. It has over the past few years worked with Garscadden primary school, which is one of my local schools, and with St Brendan’s primary school, and its projects have allowed pupils to learn more about not only other faiths and cultures but their own. The vast majority of pupils enter into such projects with great interest and enthusiasm. This could be the generation that beats bigotry once and for all. The work that organisations such as Nil by Mouth, Amina and many others do is incredibly important and must be adequately funded, but it works only when it is matched with an education policy and far-reaching initiatives that get to the heart of the problem of intolerance. Integrated approaches are essential to engender change in our communities. I trust that the Scottish Government agrees with me and that it will use the cross-party support for such campaigns as a springboard to an overview of the incredible work that the charitable sector is doing.

I congratulate the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee on its comprehensive report on the scale and effects of underemployment in Scotland. I am keen to contribute to discussions on what is a growing economic problem and to highlight the effects of underemployment on women and young people in particular. Underemployment is a deeply concerning social problem that has the ability to mask the poverty that families across Scotland face. It lurks behind unemployment figures that fail to reflect the reality of individuals who face financial hardship. I was grateful to read the submission that Professor David Bell of the University of Stirling made to the committee. I thank him and his colleagues for their continued research into the social and economic consequences of chronic underemployment in Scotland. I accept that, for most people, part-time work is better than no work at all, but thousands of people in Scotland are looking for no more than a full-time position in the company that they currently work for, or simply a job that adequately reflects their training, experience and ability. It has been suggested that the answer to the problem of underemployment is more training. Training may indeed be the answer for some young people who aspire to work in specific professions and sectors. It is often a natural solution to a problem that seems to have a disproportionate impact on those who have recently completed a course of full-time education. However, I do not believe that the negative effects of underemployment can be dealt with simply by upskilling workers to enable them to compete for higher-level positions. As we have heard, underemployment is not only about seeking more hours; it is also about people working in roles for which they are overqualified. That might be the graduate who returns to the job that they did before going to university just to make ends meet, or the college leaver who does three part-time jobs while they look for a fourth. It might involve accepting a zero-hours contract, despite the fact that such a contract does not offer any security, a guaranteed income or longer-term benefits. That is not to say that greater flexibility in working is not welcome. Part-time contracts can, in particular circumstances, offer some individuals a way of accommodating family and other commitments alongside their working life, but choosing to seek a part-time job is not the same as being compelled to take one in order to secure some work, however infrequent. That is why I join my Scottish Labour colleagues in calling on the Scottish Government to ensure that the upcoming procurement reform bill guards against the damaging use of zero-hours contracts by companies that bid for public sector contracts. I am concerned by recent statistics regarding the profile of those who are experiencing underemployment. Alongside young people, women are disproportionately affected. If we are to continue to break down the barriers of gender inequality that we still face across the country, underemployment must be addressed. I am pleased that the committee believes that improved childcare provision is important in tackling the issue, and I would urge it to consider deeper analysis of the causes of gender imbalance in those suffering from underemployment. The on-going economic challenges that we face in Scotland have had deep and damaging consequences for families across the country. We must work to ensure that surface improvements do not mask those who are struggling to make ends meet. Underemployment is a symptom of an economy that is failing to meet the needs of ordinary people. I urge the Scottish Government to do all that it can to address the damaging effects of these employment practices and to end the exploitation of workers on low incomes by large corporations for financial gain.

I am delighted to contribute to this debate on the subject of protecting tenants’ deposits. I thank Patrick Harvie for recognising the growing importance of the issue surrounding the private rented sector, and I congratulate him on securing time in the chamber to consider the implementation of the new tenancy deposit schemes in greater detail. Protecting the deposits of tenants in privately rented accommodation is an issue that I am sure the majority of members in the chamber have dealt with in their constituencies or regions. They will be aware that private landlords throughout the country have benefited from the difficulties faced by first-time buyers, the unintended consequences of the bedroom tax and the devastating reality of high unemployment. That combination of factors means that the size of the private rented sector has doubled in the past 10 years and that it now accounts for 12 per cent of all housing stock. I am aware of several tenants in my region, often young ones, whose deposits have been unfairly retained for a highly questionable justification and often with no explanation at all. That is why I welcome the introduction of the tenancy deposit schemes and the legal requirement to register deposits in one of three approved schemes. However, I am profoundly concerned that, since the introduction of the requirement, only half of all deposits have been registered. Citizens Advice Scotland has considered that failure in some detail. It highlighted that 55 per cent of tenants are completely unaware that their landlords are legally required to register deposits, despite the fact that it is the tenants who are required to take action if the landlords have not registered their deposits in one of the compulsory schemes. Furthermore, Citizens Advice Scotland confirmed that nearly 30 per cent of all housing inquiries are concerned with the private rented sector and, specifically, the unfair retention of deposits by landlords. The Scottish Government must recognise the scale of the challenge that it faces in achieving compliance with the deposit schemes, and it must provide the additional resource that will be necessary to achieve the principal aim of ensuring that tenants’ deposits are not withheld by unscrupulous landlords. In response to my recent question S4W-15152, the Scottish Government failed to commit to any changes in the way in which it enforces the deposit schemes or the support that it awards to charities such as Citizens Advice Scotland that are on the front line in the battle to protect vulnerable tenants from exploitation. Citizens Advice Scotland, Shelter Scotland and the NUS Scotland have all recognised that the Scottish Government must do more to make tenants and landlords aware of the tenancy deposit schemes. Those organisations understand that the system is currently unworkable and that too many landlords are still avoiding their responsibilities to those who rent their properties. I urge the Scottish Government to re-examine the difficulties in the implementation of the three tenancy deposit schemes and to work with organisations such as Citizens Advice Scotland to ensure that the private rented sector is free from the questionable practices of exploitative landlords.

I am delighted to contribute on the important subject of Age Scotland’s still waiting campaign, which promotes the extension of the existing national concessionary travel scheme. First, I congratulate Alison McInnes on securing the time in the chamber to highlight the campaign’s work. I commend Age Scotland for the excellent work that it has done to support Scotland’s older people. Members throughout the chamber will recognise the benefits brought by the advice, advocacy and assistance provided by Age Scotland to older people across the country. My experience of working directly with that exceptional charity’s volunteers has made me understand the difference that such support makes to older people in both urban and rural areas of the region that I represent. It is clear to the volunteers and the staff at Age Scotland that the needs of older people living in different areas are rarely the same. That is particularly true when we talk about the provision of transport and the availability of local bus services. The still waiting campaign aims to challenge the differing levels of available public transport by extending the national concessionary travel scheme to include the community transport provisions that are often far more accessible for the 188,000 disabled people in Scotland who are entitled to concessionary travel. As Age Scotland’s case studies show, extending the free travel pass scheme to include community transport providers would have profound benefits for some of the most vulnerable people in our communities. It is easy to forget that a bus fare can mean the difference between a person feeling isolated and their being able to identify as part of a wider community. Including demand-responsive transport services, such as those that are provided by the South West Community Transport scheme in Glasgow, which I visited only last month, would help older and disabled people to feel part of their local communities when otherwise they would not. More than 180 community transport providers in Scotland have provided, in the past year, more than 3.5 million journeys. Therefore, the proposal to extend the scheme seeks not to help a handful of people, but to address the needs of communities. Our rapidly ageing population means that demand for transport services among older people will increase substantially. That increase will inevitably require politicians to look again at how we provide concessionary travel to the growing population of vulnerable older and disabled people. We should take action now to ensure that tomorrow’s generation of retired and disabled people can enjoy the highest possible level of support and not be restricted from using the most accessible and beneficial transport services available to them in their communities.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what recent work it has carried out in partnership with the Glasgow Council for the Voluntary Sector. (S4O-02168)

In June last year, the Government published “Action for Jobs—Supporting Young Scots into Work: Scotland’s Youth Employment Strategy”, which highlighted the importance of the third sector in the Government’s plan to address growing unemployment. Given that the youth unemployment rate is now estimated to be more than 16 per cent, is the cabinet secretary satisfied that the objectives in the strategy are being met?

I am grateful for the opportunity to contribute to today’s debate and I thank the members of the Equal Opportunities Committee for their time on, and commitment to, the important subject of homelessness among Scotland’s young people. We know that all forms of homelessness are on the rise as a consequence of the challenging economic circumstances that we face. However, homelessness among young people is often a result not of failure to pay rent or redundancy from employment, but of family breakdown and the absence of effective intervention. The UK homelessness charity Crisis—which I thank for its detailed briefing for the debate—has identified that most young people who end up without accommodation do so because they have been told by parents or carers to leave the family home. However, it would be naive to assume that the current levels of youth unemployment across the country have played no role in family breakdowns, which can follow periods of mental ill health, deteriorating personal relationships and concerns about household finances. In truth, we can recognise that cuts to housing benefits, the welfare reforms and high unemployment affect youth homelessness just as much as they affect housing issues for people who are over the age of 25. That illustrates the need for effective intervention services that offer support and good-quality accommodation for young people after they leave the family home, or exit care services, after the age of 18. Crisis has recognised that the overwhelming majority of young people who find themselves without accommodation have been considered to be vulnerable. More than 50 per cent have been excluded from school, and more than 40 per cent have been identified as survivors of some form of abuse. A third of homeless young people are known to self-harm. The work of charities such as Shelter Scotland and Quarriers has become invaluable in efforts to achieve the aims of the Homelessness etc (Scotland) Act 2003, and is central to identifying the young people who are at most risk of becoming homeless. The most effective means of tackling the root causes of youth homelessness is third sector organisations working in partnership with well-resourced social work departments across local government. Having worked in Glasgow City Council’s social work services for children and young people, I know first hand that social work services engage with local and national voluntary organisations to share information and resources when that is necessary for the benefit of the most vulnerable young people. However, I have also experienced the effects of cuts to local government budgets and staff, and the inevitable impact that cuts have had on the ability of social work to support the young people who are most affected by family breakdown. Ambitious targets such as those in the 2003 act are commendable, but they are utterly meaningless without proper resourcing and the financial assistance that allow staff to dedicate the appropriate time to individuals and families that have unique and complex needs. The lack of affordable social housing in Scotland compounds that problem and means that, even when social work staff have addressed the needs of the young people with whom they work, the level of assistance that they can provide may be further restricted due to the limited supply of suitable accommodation. We can all agree that the existence of youth homelessness is a devastating reality and that much more should be done to protect people under 25 who face the prospect of living on the streets. Ultimately, we must commit to the necessary increase in the resources that are awarded to local government so that our social work services are able to dedicate the necessary time to every young person who is at risk in our communities. The excellent work of our voluntary sector must be complemented by an adequately funded public sector and a substantial increase in the construction of affordable social housing across the country. That collective approach is the only route to ensuring that Scotland’s young people are not casualties of Westminster’s welfare reform, the Scottish Government’s local government cuts, and rising levels of unemployment.

I am genuinely delighted to bring the campaign to recognise Mary Barbour’s achievements and legacy before the Scottish Parliament, and I thank members across the chamber for their cross-party support and for joining me in calling for a statue to be dedicated to the memory of Mrs Barbour. The impact that Mary Barbour had on the lives of women, children and ordinary families in Govan is undeniable. Too many of us are unaware of the changes that she brought about for people across Glasgow. I hope that members will acknowledge some of those changes in their speeches. Mary Rough was born into a working-class family in Kilbarchan in 1875. Later, she moved with her family to the village of Elderslie. That was before she married David Barbour and settled in the Govan area of Glasgow, where she worked as a thread twister and carpet printer. As a working-class mother of two children in Govan, she was well aware of the poverty and deprivation faced by ordinary people, particularly women. Those experiences led her to take an active part in Scotland’s first co-operative women’s guild at the Kinning Park Co-operative Society. That guild later became known for producing a generation of leading female politicians and activists, many of whom played a crucial role in the establishment of women’s housing associations throughout Glasgow and in the 1915 rent strike. It was during that rent strike that Mary became known for her effective local activism and for encouraging the political radicalisation of ordinary working people in Glasgow. Mary recognised the need to organise women into a united resistance that would fight against underhand rent increases being applied by unscrupulous landlords. In her efforts to challenge that injustice, she went on to form the South Govan Housing Association, which would later become known as Mary Barbour’s army. The housing associations later brought about an end to the protests when, on 17 November 1915, they initiated one of Glasgow’s biggest demonstrations. That mass demonstration, which included shipyard workers who downed tools, was in response to eviction notices being served on 47 local campaigners. The protestors’ march on the courts shocked the establishment so much that rents were frozen at pre-war levels, and eventually led to the Housing, Town Planning, &amp;c Act 1919. Mary became Glasgow’s first woman councillor in 1920. Throughout her 11 years as a councillor for the Fairfield ward in Govan, she championed the needs of working-class women and children. She was instrumental in the establishment of public washhouses, laundries and baths. She is perhaps most famous as the campaigner who brought about an initiative that supplied fresh milk to schoolchildren free of charge. She also promoted the development of child welfare centres, brought about the establishment of home help for vulnerable people living alone and championed the introduction of a pension scheme for mothers. Mary broke new ground in 1924 when she became the first woman baillie in the Glasgow Corporation. She used her time as baillie to support calls for birth control for women and chaired the women’s welfare and advisory clinic, Glasgow’s first family planning centre. She retired from politics in 1931, having played a pivotal role in improving the lives of working people, championing in particular the rights of women and children across Glasgow. The case for a permanent monument to commemorate Mary Barbour’s achievements is compelling. As we move towards sourcing funding for our monument, we must remember the campaign’s significance not only for Govan, Glasgow and Mary Barbour’s legacy but in highlighting the wider absence of memorials to historically significant women. The excellent work of the mapping memorials to women in Scotland project addresses that issue. Developed by women’s history Scotland, the Glasgow Women’s Library and Girlguiding Scotland, the project has helped map out the locations of memorials to women throughout Scotland. The project, which received a message of support from the First Minister last year, is vital in ensuring that the contributions of women throughout history are not overlooked. Our campaign has relied on the hard work of many people, but some deserve a special mention. I take the opportunity to thank Maria Fyfe, who chairs the remember Mary Barbour committee and has worked tirelessly to raise the campaign’s profile—she sends her sincere apologies for her unavoidable absence today; Cathy Jamieson MP; Mary Lockhart, who has worked incredibly hard within the Co-operative movement on the issue; Caroline Wilson of the Glasgow Evening Times, who has shown huge commitment to and passion for the campaign; Sharon Thomas, an artist, who was commissioned to produce a unique portrait of Mary Barbour; Elaine Dougall of Unite the Union; the women’s committee of the Scottish Trades Union Congress; Glasgow Labour women’s forum; and Glasgow city councillors. I thank all of them and the countless others who have joined us along the way. I hope that the debate will encourage greater awareness of the life and achievements of Mary Barbour. Again, I thank all those who have worked so hard to bring about a permanent and lasting reminder of a true Glasgow heroine.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what additional support it will provide to HMYOI Polmont and Education Scotland, following the decision to increase access, quality and consistency of teaching for inmates as a result of the report on HMYOI Polmont in February 2013. (S4O-02136)

I was encouraged to learn that, on 8 May, Education Scotland and the Scottish Prison Service met various organisations, including colleges of further education, to discuss the process that will enable HMYOI Polmont to provide a secure and effective learning environment. What tangible steps have been taken to implement that new initiative, and what difference should the current young offenders be able to identify in the quality and scope of their education?

At the outset, I declare an interest: I once worked for North Ayrshire Council as a community worker that covered the isle of Cumbrae. I am delighted to contribute to the debate because I know how important the subject of the exceptional biological science facility based in Millport and the recent decision to close this important national resource are. I thank my colleague, Margaret McDougall MSP, for her on-going campaigning and support, and for securing the time in the chamber to reflect on the damaging decision and to consider the effects of closure on the local and national economies. The university marine biological station Millport is ideally situated for marine biological teaching and research. In addition to providing marine biological teaching for its parent university, the University of London, the station also has a substantial national role in providing facilities and logistical support for field teaching by universities throughout the UK. It has a long tradition of quality marine biology research with a worldwide reputation, and it is a Scottish research facility that the entire nation can be proud of. With the continued threat of global warming, it is perhaps more important than ever before that research and education facilities exist to allow people to appreciate and understand the scale of the problems that we face and to develop effective responses to environmental and biological disasters. Producing well-trained and well-educated people who make a significant contribution to biological sciences is a proud tradition of Scots and the Government must do all that it can to ensure that that tradition continues, despite the closure of this exceptional facility. We know that the Higher Education Funding Council for England has withdrawn the £400,000 that it awards the University of London to run the station. While that is a devastating blow for the staff and students who use the facility, I believe that we should invest in the science facility at Millport to safeguard the jobs and maintain the quality of Scottish scientific research. Last month, the Government offered support to the staff of the facility, but that did not extend to a commitment to funding it independently following the regrettable decision by the University of London. As was mentioned earlier, I believe that the Scottish Government’s approach is short-sighted and will impact negatively on the local economy in North Ayrshire and the quality of research undertaken by Scottish universities and their students.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what projects it is funding to promote social, cultural and business links with Poland. (S4O-02106)

Recent research by the University of the West of Scotland illustrates that ethnic minority entrepreneurs often fail to seek support from readily available Government sources and that immigrants in Scotland are less likely to make use of key public services. An estimated 80,000 Polish nationals are resident in Scotland. Does the minister agree that such research suggests that the Scottish Government could be doing a huge amount more to engage with those from an eastern European background who are living in Scotland?

As a member of the Public Petitions Committee, I welcome this debate on Professor David Crichton’s petition, in which he calls on the Scottish Parliament to urge the Scottish Government to represent Scottish interests in the current discussions between the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the United Kingdom insurance industry. Before I start, I want to wish the convener of the Public Petitions Committee a speedy recovery. I know that he was looking forward to being here today, but unfortunately he is not so good. I hope that he is soon back in the committee. I want to highlight the growing concerns of many constituents about insurance companies’ hesitancy to provide cover against flood damage to their homes. Thousands of people across Scotland are suffering from decisions by the Association of British Insurers not to renew the statement of principles on flood insurance when the agreement expires in June. As a result of that decision, policy holders in high-risk areas have been left with no assurance that they will be able to secure affordable insurance policies to cover their assets against natural disasters. Failure to reach an agreement will mean that the cost of household insurance for ordinary home owners is likely to rise substantially. That will result in many families being priced out of an insurance policy that would provide protection for the biggest investment in their lives—their home. This is not an insignificant or isolated issue that affects only a small number of properties that are located around the coast or near large rivers. This is a huge issue for thousands of households throughout Scotland. Four of the five wettest years on record have been since 2000—we have all got the umbrellas and frizzy hair to prove it. The Scottish Environment Protection Agency has recognised that flooding is the greatest natural threat facing the UK and has estimated that approximately 112,000 homes and 14,000 businesses across Scotland are at serious risk of flooding. One out of every 22 homes and one out of every 14 businesses in Scotland are considered to be at risk from coastal, river or surface flooding. That means that a huge number of homes and businesses throughout the country face dramatic increases in the cost of insurance if a workable solution is not found in the near future, through negotiation between the insurance industry and Government. I understand that positive steps have been made towards reconciling some of the issues that have been highlighted by the Association of British Insurers and the working procedures of the statutory bodies that are charged with oversight of flooding concerns. Such an agreement has been reached with 29 of the 32 local authorities, meaning that relevant information can be shared through the Scottish flood defence asset database with stakeholders, including insurance bodies, for the task of price setting. I welcome that development and recognise that much more collaboration is necessary between local authorities, Government and the insurance industry to bring about a resolution that benefits home owners in areas that are most at risk of flooding. I am concerned that the date of extinction of the previous agreement is fast approaching, and I am aware that families and businesses in Scotland would appreciate the certainty that a renewed statement of principles would bring. I urge stakeholders to work together, with urgency, so that we can provide affordable, comprehensive insurance policies for those individuals who are at risk of being unable to afford the most basic cover for their property against the threat of natural disaster.

I am delighted to take part in this debate on the subject of the blacklisting of Scottish construction workers. I thank my colleague Neil Findlay, not only for securing this time to discuss the disgraceful practices of some of the best-known names in the construction industry but for his tireless campaigning to achieve justice for those who have been left unemployable as a result of their trade union activities. The blacklisting of construction workers by private companies meant that hundreds of workers were denied the chance to make a living and provide for their families. Those 582 workers were profoundly disadvantaged, and not because they were underperforming in their jobs or failing to meet the industry standards expected of them. Their employment was terminated due to their membership of a trade union, for holding political views not shared by their employers, or for raising real concerns about health and safety practices. They were illegally penalised for that in a manner that reflects neither the society in which we live nor the way that we believe that business should be conducted in Scotland. The revelations are shocking. My own shock at the blacklisting of innocent and hardworking employees is compounded further by learning that known blacklisting practitioners are profiting directly from public contracts. It does our workers and our people a discredit to allow those who have broken the law to profiteer through building our schools, health facilities and transport links. We cannot undo the human rights abuses that have been committed, but we have an opportunity to ensure that they are never repeated and are not rewarded. I support my colleagues in asking the Scottish Government to review its procurement processes and to reconsider the involvement in the building of the Forth replacement crossing of companies that have been the major participants in the blacklisting scandal. That is a significant, high-profile project, and we should use it to showcase the best of Scottish industry, not to support the business of law breakers with profits from taxpayers. I urge the Scottish Government to act on the recommendation from members across the chamber that anti-blacklisting measures be included in the upcoming procurement reform bill. In legislating against the tendering for future contracts by blacklisting companies, we will assure Scots that they live in a society that values and supports working people. We have a duty to set a strong and unambiguous example to employers in all sectors and to go some way to rectifying the scandalous practices that have blighted individuals, families and communities throughout Scotland for too long.

I am delighted to take part in this debate on the important subject of Scotland’s outstanding voluntary sector. I thank Gavin Brown for securing the time in the chamber to consider the pressures facing third sector organisations. The on-going economic circumstances mean that, for charities of all sizes, securing funding is a continuous struggle. In my region of Glasgow, few—if any—organisations can be confident about their ability to provide crucial services over the next few years. Many operate on budgets that represent a fraction of what they used to receive. Welfare reforms mean that more and more ordinary Scottish people will rely on the ability of charities to provide additional support for communities that had until recently been able to survive without assistance. That hardship has been compounded by the Scottish Government’s hesitation to mitigate those reforms and by the draconian cuts that have been handed down to councils throughout Scotland. A grave example of that is food banks. In this country, food banks are now feeding more than 14,000 people every year—that is 14,000 people who can no longer put food on the table for their families and who cannot afford to do anything other than put a roof over their heads. The number of people who rely on food banks has risen by more than 150 per cent compared with the same time in 2012 and it shows no signs of falling. That is the devastating reality of living in the eighth-richest nation on earth. Our priorities should always be to invest in the economy to create jobs—[Interruption.] I am not sure whether someone wants to intervene. Our priority should also be to reduce the devastating level of unemployment throughout the country. However, if we are to cut benefits, public sector funding and local government funding, how do we expect the most vulnerable among us to survive? We often talk in the chamber about the tragic choice between heating and eating. The reality is that some of the families whom we are talking about do not even have such a luxury. I agree that the third sector plays a crucial role in improving the lives of the most vulnerable people in our communities. I also agree with the SCVO that steps could be taken to improve the third sector’s efficiency without allocating increased financial resources at a time of economic hardship. Instead of awarding grants on a six-monthly or annual basis, we should commit to the projects that we support and offer our charities—small and large—the security of a three-year funding commitment. Overburdening charities that are already overstretched is not a solution to the problems caused by political mismanagement. If we want the voluntary sector to deliver more, we must find the resources to fund it appropriately. To challenge effectively the growing levels of poverty and disadvantage in Scotland, the public and voluntary sectors must work together to provide assistance to those who need it most, without leaving the most vulnerable people in our communities behind.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to contribute to this hugely important debate. Given the widespread impact of the benefit cuts on some of the most vulnerable people in our communities, I will focus on the effects of welfare reform on women. Since long before the 2008 recession and the election of our coalition Government in 2010, women have been paid less than men, are more likely to be unemployed than men and are more often employed in a part-time, temporary role than their male counterparts are. The economic crisis and the policies of our Governments have caused that inequality to increase, and it is women once again who are suffering disproportionately from the disgraceful welfare reforms inspired by both Governments. At this time of hardship and struggle for Scottish families, the removal of key financial assistance is a disaster both for those who are in work and for those who are out of work, and it has proved to be especially damaging for women and the wider pursuit of economic equality. The abolition of the health in pregnancy grant means that since January 2011 expectant mothers are £190 worse off and receive no direct financial support towards the costs of starting a family. If a pregnant woman already has a child under 16, she will no longer receive the £500 sure start maternity grant that was available to unemployed parents and those in low-paid jobs. Child benefit, which is often paid directly to mothers, will be capped for three years, resulting in a loss of more than £1,000 for a family with two children. Even the statutory maternity payment has been cut in real terms and is likely to be reduced by nearly £300 a year by 2015. At a time when family budgets are increasingly squeezed, the removal of such assistance has a huge impact on efforts to achieve economic equality between the sexes, and it will increase the dependency of women on other sources of income—often the salary of a male partner. That is unsustainable and does nothing to realise the ambition for a society in which women are valued equally to men and empowered to take control over their own financial affairs.

Absolutely. That was not a point that I was going to cover in my speech, so I thank Bob Doris for raising it. All across Scotland, workers are being paid less, businesses are closing down and employees are being made redundant. Families are being forced out of their homes, first-time buyers are priced out of the market and graduates are taught to forget the aspirations that took them to university in the first place. Devolution was made for such a situation. It falls to the Scottish Government to use the powers that it has and to do all that it can to protect the unemployed and those in low-paid jobs. The draconian cuts to local government budgets mean that the last line of defence against the welfare reforms are outrageously underfunded. I urge the Scottish Government to reconsider its short-sighted approach to tackling the coalition Government’s welfare reforms, and to reflect on the need for proactive responses to benefit cuts that deliver real solutions for ordinary Scottish families.

In these tough economic circumstances, it is right that the Parliament takes time to scrutinise how Scotland uses its buying power to promote social and economic development. Our public sector spends more than £9 billion every year on procurement, and it is increasingly important that that money is used to benefit the communities that are hardest hit by rising levels of unemployment. How the Scottish Government acquires goods and services impacts significantly on small and medium-sized businesses and can support those enterprises that are worst affected by continuing financial pressures. In turn, those businesses play a vital role in sustaining communities and providing employment for workers. The criteria by which we award public sector contracts dictate the emphasis that companies place on the working conditions of their employees and the commitment that they make to investing in Scottish communities. It is profoundly shortsighted of any Government to award contracts solely on the basis of the lowest tender. That approach fails to recognise the long-term consequences of driving down wages and sending jobs abroad. I accept that there must be a balance between the pursuit of wider social aims and value for money for the taxpayer. However, I do not believe that those two aspirations are incompatible. If the Scottish Government were to prioritise the working conditions of staff as a key criterion in the procurement process, entire communities would be better off as a result. Although the Scottish Government has ruled out supporting legislation for a living wage, that would have made it easier to avoid situations where the working conditions of employees are compromised in order to achieve the most competitive tender.

I thank the cabinet secretary for that. The Jimmy Reid Foundation report on procurement in the public sector identified that the Scottish Government too often locks Scottish companies out from being able to bid for public sector contracts. Often, the contracts are so large and incorporate so many distinct elements that many small and medium-sized businesses are unable to compete for them. That results in contracts being awarded to huge multinational companies and in investment that could have supported local industries and small businesses being taken out of Scotland. The Scottish Government’s proposed procurement reform bill offers the Parliament an opportunity to change that unsustainable practice and to stand up for those businesses that, until now, have been unable to bid for lucrative public sector contracts. The Government should seek to invest in those communities that stand to benefit from providing goods and services to public bodies and which can grow their businesses to employ greater numbers of workers in Scotland. That would provide the dual benefit of investing directly in Scottish communities and tackling the problems of unemployment and slow economic growth across the country. In the future, our procurement process should seek to exclude those companies that have sought to evade their responsibility as employers and those that have acted illegally to conspire against employees who are active in trade unions—and I welcome trade union members in the public gallery. I also welcome the Deputy First Minister’s commitment to consider the issue. Companies that blacklist workers in the construction sector should serve as an example of private sector employers that are unfit to be awarded public sector contracts. That should be addressed under some of the criteria in the tendering process. Those companies that have taken part in that disgraceful practice should not be able to bid for public sector contracts, and the right of employees to be active in trade unions should never be compromised by private businesses, particularly those that act on behalf of local authorities and national Government. I encourage the Scottish Government to review the parts of the procurement system that are failing enterprises, communities, trade unions and the taxpayer. I urge the cabinet secretary to ensure that the forthcoming procurement reform bill better addresses the concerns of Scottish business and makes it easier for small companies and SMEs to access what is often a complex bidding process in public sector organisations. If we can achieve that ambition, we can be sure that benefits will be realised not just by those who bid for government contracts but by families across Scotland who rely on the success of Scottish businesses and their impact on our local economies.

I am pleased to begin the debate by speaking to my amendment 5. The amendment seeks to achieve the same effect as one that I proposed at stage 2 at the Local Government and Regeneration Committee and later withdrew on the strength of an undertaking from the minister that he would reconsider the issue in detail. Amendment 5 seeks to expand the definition of a high hedge so that the bill will not be unnecessarily restrictive and will be able to offer remedies to those who suffer from high hedge disputes irrespective of the type of hedge or nuisance vegetation concerned. The current definition of “a row of 2 or more evergreen or semi-evergreen trees or shrubs” in section 1(1)(a) is unnecessarily restrictive, and I am concerned that the exclusion of deciduous species will leave those involved in some of the longest-standing disputes without resolutions to the problems that they face. Therefore, my amendment seeks to amend that provision by removing “evergreen or semi-evergreen” altogether and changing the definition of a high hedge to simply “a row of 2 or more trees or shrubs”. That approach will enable the inclusion of deciduous species by default, as it will exclude no species of shrub, tree or hedge from the bill. That means that home owners who suffer from high hedge disputes would be more likely to achieve successful resolution to neighbour disputes and would not be restricted from achieving such an outcome as a result of a subtle technicality. I move amendment 5.

I am pleased that the Minister for Local Government and Planning and Mark McDonald, the member in charge of the bill, have fully considered my amendment and will be supporting an expansion of the definition of a high hedge. I am grateful to have received cross-party support on the issue, and I thank all members who have made thoughtful contributions to the debate. I recognise the importance of protecting biodiversity in all areas of Scotland, and I am reassured that the bill will not have a negative impact on local wildlife populations. I anticipate that the bill will apply only to a limited number of cases, where all other options have been exhausted. In those circumstances, it is right that we offer home owners a remedy to on-going disputes and an opportunity to remove intrusive trees and hedges from neighbouring properties. Stuart McMillan asked about the financial impact of an increase in cases following the expansion of the scope of section 1. I reassure members that section 25 provides for local authorities to recover the costs of enforcement. It is clear that expansion of the definition will not vastly increase the financial burden on local government. The campaign group Scothedge says that only 20 per cent of its members are in dispute about a deciduous high hedge, and it anticipates that the increase in workload will be minimal. I support the bill as a means of resolving community breakdown following disputes over hedges on neighbouring properties. The bill should be fit for purpose, offering a remedy to all who suffer from such issues. That is why I lodged amendment 5 and strongly believe that it will increase the bill’s scope and effectiveness. Amendment 5 agreed to. Section 31A—Report on operation of Act

As a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, I welcome the opportunity to scrutinise once again the proposals of the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill. I fully support efforts to address the problem of neighbour disputes that result from overgrown vegetation and agree that local authorities should have the authority to intervene in those cases. My amendment, which was supported by Christine Grahame, has sought to ensure that the bill applies as widely as is reasonable, and that no individual is excluded from achieving a resolution to a problem arising from intrusive hedging as a result of a subtle technicality that is contained within the provisions. It is our responsibility, as parliamentarians, to ensure that the measures that are contained within the bill are fit for purpose, and to fully address the concerns that communities might have about local wildlife populations and biodiversity. The current provisions in the bill allow local authorities to exercise discretion in their consideration of applications and to take into account the wider effects of a removal order on the environment. I do not believe that the expansion of the definition of a high hedge will compromise the ability of local government to protect areas of local and regional significance. Further, I anticipate that the addition of deciduous species to the definition of a high hedge will be of minimal impact in practice. Garden trees represent around only 1 per cent of Scotland’s woodland assets and single trees will not be covered by the provisions of the bill. Overall, I believe that that represents a pragmatic approach to dealing with a wide range of local concerns while delivering a remedy to those families who have suffered disputes with neighbouring properties for too long. We must acknowledge that high hedges not only act as a barrier to light, but lower property values, obstruct boiler flues and block television cables. Overgrown vegetation can cause a variety of problems that make life difficult for the adjacent properties and encourage community breakdown. I support the aims of the bill and believe that it is right that families that, for too long, have been involved in unsuccessful negotiations will be provided with a resolution to achieve an end to their neighbour disputes. I thank my colleagues for their cross-party support. I also thank Mark McDonald, the member in charge of the bill, and Derek Mackay, the Minister for Local Government and Planning, for their support. I also thank the clerks of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee for enabling the bill to be agreed to—I hope—at 5 pm tonight.

I thank my colleague, Neil Findlay, for securing the debate, and I welcome the members of our mining community who are here today in Parliament to highlight the grave injustice that was perpetrated by police against our mining community. In the light of the South Yorkshire Police post-Hillsborough cover-up, there is now an Independent Police Complaints Commission investigation into a similar attempted cover-up by the same police authority at the Orgreave plant clashes. We now know that statements were altered either to remove or change negative comments about policing on the day that 96 Liverpool supporters lost their lives in April 1989. Five years earlier at Orgreave, 8,000 picketing miners and 4,500 police clashed at a British Steel plant. Compensation of £500,000 was paid to 95 miners who were arrested during these clashes, but no officer has ever been disciplined in relation to the events. Provisional estimates by the National Union of Mineworkers suggest that 60 per cent of the charges that were brought for picket-line offences were bogus or exaggerated. Most worrying is that, as NUM leader Chris Kitchen has said, the police corruption may have been more widespread, so it is important to look beyond Hillsborough and Orgreave. The possibility that such practices were used during the miners’ strike in Midlothian and across Scotland—I know that Neil Findlay MSP has received information that that is the case—surely means that the Scottish Government and police have a duty to look again at the cases of the 500 men who were convicted during the miners’ strike. The allegations against the police range from fabrication and duplication of witness statements to perjury and misconduct in public office. Such actions may have led to the arrest of pickets on bogus or exaggerated grounds. The refusal of the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to review the criminal records of those men is very disappointing; after 28 years, those men deserve justice. I call on the cabinet secretary, Kenny MacAskill, to launch a full, comprehensive and independent review of all the convictions that were brought against those who were involved in the disputes. The men who received criminal records inevitably found it incredibly difficult to get work after the strike. That is the real human cost of those potential miscarriages of justice. I urge any miners and others who were arrested and who feel that the charges against them were unjust to contact my colleague Neil Findlay MSP, whom I applaud for all the good work that he has done on the issue. It appears that the true story of the miners’ strike is just beginning to be told. With the creation of the new national police service of Scotland, it is as important now as it has ever been that we have proper scrutiny of policing operations. Although the police in Scotland have not been involved in the same scandals as the police service in England, the experience of picketers in Scotland during the miners’ strike shows us that we must never be complacent. In closing, I say that I feel passionately about the issue because I was born and brought up in a mining community. I will await with keen interest the progress of today’s debate and developments thereafter.

I am keen to contribute towards the debate on the quality of the lives of children in Scotland—most importantly, on how we can continue to improve the services and opportunities that we offer to our youngest citizens. As a mother of three children, I know full well that Scotland is often an exceptional place for young people to grow up in. However, I also know, through my work experience in the voluntary sector and with statutory organisations that work with young people, that it can be much better. It is a tragic reality that 22,000 children grow up in poverty in Scotland and that these children are likely to have significantly reduced life expectancies, poorer qualifications and poorer health compared with their peers. The impact of the UK Government’s welfare reforms will not help the situation of struggling families in Scotland; instead, it will compound the disadvantage and inequality that already exists. That is why it is so important that this Scottish Government does all that it can to tackle child poverty. I welcomed this Government’s commitment to provide 600 hours of free nursery education to children in Scotland every year, but I am concerned that that has still not been delivered. It is no longer enough to pay lip service to the needs of children and families. It is now imperative that the Government delivers on its promises and supports those families who are least able to provide financially for their children. Barnardo’s Scotland has been working to highlight the difficulties that are faced by children and young people who are leaving the care system for the first time. It has campaigned for a range of resources to support those in that situation, who have no immediate family of their own. As Barnardo’s has recognised, the voluntary sector plays a crucial role in providing that necessary support but, all too often, charities are restricted by a lack of funding and resources. It is incumbent on the Scottish Government to recognise the third sector’s invaluable work and its own responsibility to ensure that those organisations are well supported in delivering for the most vulnerable young people. Both Barnardo’s and Save the Children acknowledge that there are severe educational and health inequalities between children who are in poverty and those who are not. According to Save the Children, children brought up in poverty are three times more likely to suffer mental health issues and children from deprived areas are twice as likely as their peers to be unemployed after they leave school. Poverty is clearly the biggest issue that our children can face and it falls upon us to tackle its root causes. I am determined that no future generations should have to grow up the way so many of today’s children grow up, and I strongly believe that this Government should do all it can to limit and ultimately end the disadvantage and inequality that many children in Scotland face.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what support it is giving to Her Majesty’s Young Offenders Institution Polmont to implement recommendations arising from the full inspection carried out in October 2012. (S4O-01898)

How does the Scottish Government plan to address the fact that, currently, only 45 per cent of young offenders at Polmont access education programmes? Does the cabinet secretary share my view that greater participation in those programmes, smaller class sizes and increased opportunities to participate in learning during evenings and weekends are imperative if we hope to reduce reoffending rates and encourage rehabilitation of young offenders in our communities?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what action it has taken to address the issues identified by the report of the commission on women offenders. (S4O-01888)

The report cited the failure of the Scottish Government’s mental health strategy to place sufficient emphasis on women in prison. Given that more than 80 per cent of female prisoners in Cornton Vale have a recognised serious mental health problem, does the cabinet secretary recognise the importance of that issue?

Like others, I congratulate the members of the Finance Committee and their support team on their informative report and thank them for it. Demographic change and the ageing population in particular are becoming a major concern in relation to Scotland’s fiscal sustainability. The Finance Committee’s report on the issue highlights some key issues and concerns with regard to the implications of such change for the public finances. Since the 2001 census, Scotland’s population has increased by 5 per cent to 5,295,000—its highest ever. The population has also become older. The National Records of Scotland’s projections indicate that although the working-age population is set to increase by 7 per cent between 2010 and 2035, the number of those of pensionable age will increase by 26 per cent over the same period. Healthy life expectancy is at the core of much of the discussion about the demand for local services from an ageing population. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has shown the importance of healthy life expectancy by stating that “age alone is not a sufficient indicator of likely need or demand for services.” In addition, it highlights the “profound impacts on health needs and people living in deprived areas” that disadvantage and poverty can have. One of the key recommendations in Audit Scotland’s report on health inequalities is that national indicators specifically to monitor progress in reducing health inequalities should be introduced. In its projections on the impacts of demographic change on adult health and social care expenditure, the Association of Directors of Social Work has highlighted the importance of planning and reliable data on healthy life expectancy by showing that the difference between the best and worst-case scenarios will be more than £1 billion by 2030. It is of deep concern not only that Scotland has one of the lowest life expectancies in western Europe, but that the gap between healthy life expectancy and life expectancy for men has been widening. With regard to the plans that different levels of Government have in place to tackle the impact of demographic change, COSLA has revealed that the gap between the demand for services and the available resources will rise to almost £3 billion by 2016-17. While half of that can be attributed to the amount of available funding, the other half, more alarmingly, can be attributed to the rising demand for services that is driven in large part by demographics and the rising number of older people who will need services. While long-term strategies to combat that problem may be successful, the Christie commission pointed out that there is a serious short to long-term problem of income and demand. An ageing society will also impact on health and social care. NHS Ayrshire and Arran has highlighted the fact that funding has not increased in line with demographic change, leading to the eligibility criteria for social care becoming tighter and tighter. More and more needs to be done to increase resilience at community level, so that we avoid unnecessary hospitalisation and speed up the return home from hospital. The report highlighted the need for a shift towards preventative spending, including through the integration of health and social services. It is worrying that Audit Scotland said: “in reality services have been slow to adapt and we have found it hard to see evidence of meaningful shifts in the way resources are used over time”. Demographic change and an ageing population will create big pressures on housing stock. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation has pointed out that our society is more marked by solo living, which reflects relationship breakdown and emerging social trends. More and more people will live alone in their old age, which has implications for the supply of housing stock. The Government published a national strategy for housing for Scotland’s older people, which sets out a national framework for the delivery of housing stock that is suitable for older people, but concern has been expressed about how effective the strategy is likely to be. The Finance Committee highlighted the key challenges for Scotland that are presented by our ageing population and other demographic changes. The Scottish Government must make the decisions that are necessary if we are to safeguard high-quality public services for future generations to enjoy. I look forward to the Scottish Government’s formal response to the report, which I am sure will give examples of good practice and talk about how they are shared throughout Scotland through strong leadership.

As a parent of three lovely young children and a former chair of the Blairdardie primary school parent board in Glasgow, I am delighted to take part in the discussions on the importance of parenting. I welcome the Scottish Government’s £18 million investment in a national parenting strategy that develops information, advice and support for those with guardianship and caring responsibilities for Scotland’s youngest citizens. I thank John Mason for securing the debate. I agree fully with his views that fathers play an important role in the upbringing of their children, and that the rights and responsibilities of fathers should not be underestimated. I acknowledge that the national parenting strategy seeks to pursue more father-friendly services and policies, so that dads play an active role in the lives of their children and benefit from the same support services traditionally available only to mothers. I caution against any implication that families without fathers are deficient or lack the necessary support structures to raise children in a safe and loving environment. Many children and young people have been brought up in single-parent families, and the absence of a father does not necessarily lead to less well-adjusted, healthy or successful young people as a result. Good parenting is about the commitment of the parent, or parents, to securing the welfare of their children, and it is enhanced by access to well-funded support structures that enable mothers and fathers to provide financially for their families. An increasing number of young people are raised by same-sex parents. Those families are no less successful in providing the same stable and loving environment for their children than households with married heterosexual parents. Families come in all shapes and sizes. Every parent—and not just fathers—deserves the full support of the Government and local authorities in raising healthy and happy children. I often talk about Parent Network Scotland when I speak in a debate on parenting. That voluntary organisation, which is based in Glasgow, provides training courses and support to parents in a non-judgmental and safe environment. All its programmes, which are evidence based, home grown and bottom-up led, have been evaluated by the University of Strathclyde. I have seen at first hand the positive effect that Parent Network Scotland’s service can have on families and the increased confidence that parents enjoy as a result of the support that its staff offer. I believe that the Scottish Government’s parenting strategy should seek to recognise and build on the invaluable work that Parent Network Scotland and other organisations undertake in supporting parents and building the capacity of mothers and fathers to raise successful, healthy and talented young people. Parent Network Scotland achieves all that. I believe that it is an outstanding network, because it is about parent power—it is about parents empowering and supporting other parents in their community. As you can tell, as someone with a community development background and community development training, I am a huge fan of programmes and organisations that involve a bottom-up approach.

As a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, I have been involved in discussions about both the pace and the quality of public service reform in local authorities for some time. Our discussions and evidence-taking sessions illustrated some of the key issues that local authorities, stakeholders and communities face in seeking to achieve reform that makes way for a cost-efficient and, crucially, more effective way of providing key public services. Now more than ever, it is clear that the reform and evolution of our public services are high on the political agenda as a means of achieving budget reductions and ensuring that efficiency savings are made. Although that may be an unavoidable reality for local authorities across Scotland, pursuing reform on the basis of cost savings alone is not a route to the delivery of high-quality services and will only lead to compromised decision making that fails to put communities and service users at the heart of the process. Community involvement in the delivery of communities’ own public services is vital, and I believe that it represents a co-operative model of decision making that should be replicated across Scotland’s 32 local authorities. Those who are most affected by changes to service delivery should be at the heart of discussions about reform. That approach will lead to a better informed model of decision making that has the priorities of service users at its heart. Community planning partnerships can prove to be an invaluable resource for local authorities in the development of public services and they often highlight the key challenges that are likely to be faced in periods of restructuring and re-evaluation of working practices. However, we learned from the evidence that the committee took and the communities that we visited that, too often, representatives on community planning partnerships illustrate only the perspective of the service that they represent. It is crucial that we open up the policy-making process to include a broader representation of our communities—particularly those that rely on services. Of course, reform to achieve savings and reform to increase the quality of service are not always mutually exclusive. Evidence gathered from a number of local authorities, including North Lanarkshire Council and Orkney Islands Council, cites the emerging emphasis on partnership and shared working practices. In many cases, partnership working enables local authorities to provide services more efficiently while increasing collaboration and the avoidance of duplication. However, we must ensure that partnership working does not erode the rights of communities to hold local authorities to account in relation to the services that they provide

The example that Mr Stewart mentions was excellent. The recent report by the Finance Committee on Scotland’s changing demographics, which showed an increase in the number of people of pensionable age, illustrates the challenges that we face and highlights our responsibility to evolve our public services in a way that provides high-quality and efficient resourcing into the future. The population of those aged 75 and over is projected to increase by 82 per cent between 2010 and 2035. That represents a set of obstacles that will demand new ways of working and a renewed commitment to engaging with service users in the development of local resources. We know that local authorities have been hit hard by the Scottish Government, absorbing 50 per cent of all cuts in the recent budget. If we are to address the growing challenges that our population will face in the future, it is time to invest in local government and acknowledge the vital role that each of our 32 authorities plays in delivering services, protecting resources and ensuring a higher standard of living for some of the most vulnerable people in our communities.

I am delighted to contribute to this debate on the 50 miles per hour campaign, and I thank David Stewart MSP for securing the time for it. I know that my colleague has a wealth of experience in advocating on road safety issues and is well placed to illustrate the key issues that surround the important proposal. The UK Government has welcomed the proposition to increase the speed limit for HGVs on single carriageways from 40mph to 50mph, and the proposition is the subject of a Government consultation document at Westminster. It has also gained the approval of the Automobile Association and the Institute of Advanced Motorists, which has welcomed it as a “common sense move” that would be welcomed by all drivers, not only HGV drivers. However, other groups have expressed concerns about the proposal. The consultation document highlighted some of the advantages that such a move could bring. One such advantage would be the reduction of congestion and frustration on our roads, as members have already said. A common problem on many long-distance rural roads is the large number of cars that can potentially drive faster but are often stuck behind HGVs that stick to the speed limit. That leads to frustration for drivers, who often attempt extremely dangerous overtaking manoeuvres, which can often lead to fatalities. It has been argued that the proposals will mean that those platoons of traffic will be less likely to attempt such manoeuvres, which will, in turn, lead to fewer accidents. In addition, it is believed that the proposals will lead to a more level playing field for freight operators. Government figures suggest that 70 per cent of UK lorry traffic exceeds the current speed limit. In such a time-sensitive industry, that gives the drivers concerned an unfair advantage over those who follow the law. The proposal, which would affect around 280,000 vehicles, would also have obvious economic benefits. For example, it is estimated that companies would save up to 2.4 million driving hours per year and between £31 million and £36 million, making them more profitable, allowing them to take on more workers, increasing tax revenues and providing a much-needed boost to related industries such as fuel and tyre suppliers. That said, we must acknowledge the proposal’s potential disadvantages. Increased wear and tear on the road network would mean increased repair costs for local authorities, and there is also a potential for more serious accidents. The road safety charity Brake has expressed concern, citing the direct link between traffic speed and the number of devastating crashes and casualties on our roads. It is of utmost importance that, in considering this proposal, we carefully consider and reflect on the evidence of all its effects on road safety, the environment and the economy before we make any decision. I call on the Scottish Government to consider the experimental trial and pilot study that my colleagues have already mentioned.

As a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, I welcome the opportunity to scrutinise the Government’s proposals in the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill. It is clear that the bill aims to address what can often be a major source of anti-social behaviour in our communities and intends to provide individuals with a course of action to address the problem of overhanging or intrusive hedges on a neighbouring property. It is an unfortunate reality that a dispute over an overgrown hedge can quickly escalate into an issue that impacts on families’ quality of life and encourages the breakdown of communities. As a result, it is in the interests of public authorities to have the power to intervene and to offer remedies in cases in which disputes between neighbours cannot be resolved through independent negotiation. However, we must ensure that the provisions that are contained within the High Hedges (Scotland) Bill are fit for purpose and can deliver the outcomes that organisations such as Scothedge have been campaigning for. Scothedge has campaigned to raise awareness of the problems that are faced by victims of the nuisance of high hedges and has already identified a number of potential problems with the bill. Principally, the exclusion of deciduous hedges and problematic single trees means that the bill could fail to tackle instances of neighbour disputes that are prevalent across Scotland. The current definition of “a row of 2 or more evergreen or semi-evergreen trees or shrubs” is clearly restrictive and will require amendment if it becomes clear that too many high-hedge disputes are not covered by that narrow description. Further analysis of that provision is necessary; the Scottish Government can learn lessons from the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003, which contains statutory authority on cases of high hedges and nuisance vegetation in England. The Scottish Government should reflect on the application of the 2003 act and perhaps seek to amend the bill provisions to make the legislation as effective and comprehensive as possible. We must acknowledge that high hedges that result in neighbour disputes are a real and serious problem that too many Scottish families face. High hedges do not just act as a barrier to light; they can restrict views, lower property values, obstruct boiler flues and block television cables. It is right that the Scottish Government is taking positive action to tackle those problems, but in order to achieve that, the legislation must fully address the complex and difficult nature of the issue. We know that a number of campaigners are already concerned that the definition of “high hedges” is too narrow and I anticipate the bill as it currently stands being satisfactory in only a proportion of problem cases, failing to improve the situation of many who are affected by these issues. I urge the Scottish Government to reflect on the speeches by members of Opposition parties in the chamber and to work towards a consensus that is in the best interests of families and individuals across Scotland.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what the Lord Advocate’s position is on the legal validity of the agreement between the United Kingdom and Scottish Governments on an independence referendum. (S4O-01750)

In response to a question from my colleague Mark Griffin MSP, the Lord Advocate said: “the Edinburgh agreement, in laying out an agreed route to independence, provided the basis upon which specific legal advice could be sought.”—[Official Report, 7 November 2012; c 13131.] However, the Lord Advocate will be aware that the Advocate General for Scotland said in a written answer that was published this morning that “The agreement signed by both the UK and Scottish Governments on 15 October 2012 is a non-statutory statement of the agreement reached between the two Governments ... It has no relevance to matters beyond the process for holding a referendum”.—[Official Report, House of Lords, 29 January 2013; Vol 742, c WA323-4.] In light of that, does the Lord Advocate fully stand by his previous statements that the agreement itself provided a legitimate trigger to release, or authorise the release of, legal advice on European Union membership?

Before I begin, I declare an interest, in that I am a member of Scotwest Credit Union, Glasgow Credit Union and the cross-party group on credit unions. I am delighted to contribute to this debate on the increasingly squeezed standards of living for families in Scotland and to express my growing concern that a part of the financial industry that is responsible for the economic crash is continuing to profit from some of the most deprived people in our communities. Companies offering payday loans have increased their market share by more than 400 per cent in the past three years. They now represent a significant presence on our high streets in towns and cities throughout Scotland. It is easy to understand the temptation of a cash advance on a monthly wage, particularly for those in low-paid employment, with household bills that consume the majority of their earnings. However, the interest rates on payday loans are nothing short of exploitative, with a loan of £300 over a period of 30 days costing around £100 in interest and fees alone. Payday loans do not offer Scottish families a sustainable solution to what are often very serious financial problems, and more needs to be done to offer viable alternatives to such questionable business practices. Families who need access to affordable credit within a short timeframe have limited options, and they are often unaware of the provisions that are made by local authorities, organisations and charities in their communities, which are specifically designed to offer support to people in those circumstances. I believe that credit unions hold the answer. As a Glasgow MSP who is active in the cross-party group on credit unions, I am delighted that one in five Glaswegians is a member of a credit union. In my region of Glasgow, Drumchapel Community Credit Union provides short-term loans to more than 3,000 registered customers in the local area, with an APR of between 15 and 26 per cent. Drumchapel Community Credit Union was the very first to be established in Scotland. For more than 40 years, it has provided families in Drumchapel with affordable credit to meet unexpected financial demands, such as the huge rise in the cost of energy for households over the past few years. Customers are encouraged by the team of staff and volunteers to repay loans over a longer period in order to spread the burden, and to develop a financial plan that details how their monthly income meets expected outgoings, so as to ensure that short-term loans do not need to be relied on as a source of income in the future. I call on the Scottish Government to support an increase in investment in Scottish credit unions so that they can offer products equivalent to payday loans on a fair and affordable rate of interest. It is clear that the standard of living for Scottish families has been squeezed considerably. I understand the increased financial pressure that thousands of Scots endure as a result of low wages and high unemployment, and it is vital that the Scottish Government and local authorities recognise and support the invaluable work of local organisations such as credit unions and the key role that they play in tackling disadvantage and poverty throughout Scotland.

The current economic reality of low wages and high unemployment has led to some of the most difficult years in living memory for thousands of Scottish families. That, coupled with the rising costs of energy, has resulted in an increase in Scots suffering fuel poverty, as we heard. Every day, people are forced to make a choice between putting food on the table and heating their homes. We live in one of the richest nations and it should be unthinkable that so many of our constituents struggle to keep their families warm during the cold winter months, yet 684,000 Scottish people are currently suffering fuel poverty and allotting more than 10 per cent of their household income to meeting the inflated demands of the big six energy firms that operate in the UK. The Scottish average for the proportion of income that is spent on energy has reached 14 per cent, which is tragic when we consider that the Scottish Government pledged to eradicate fuel poverty by 2016. I accept that rapidly increasing energy costs have had a significant impact on the achievability of the target. However, the Government has yet to show how it intends to abolish fuel poverty, given that fuel poverty rose last year and the situation shows no sign of improving in the immediate future. The Government’s decision to slash a budget that was specifically intended to address fuel poverty in Scotland has meant that thousands of the most vulnerable people in our communities are unable to heat their homes throughout winter. The Government chose to reduce the financial allocation for fuel poverty initiatives by more than £14 million last year. That had a direct impact on, for example, citizens advice bureaux, which have been inundated with requests for assistance with rising energy costs, mostly from young single women who live in rented housing. The Government needs to deliver on the promises that it makes to the people of Scotland. It should come clean on why it chose to diminish the support that is offered to individuals who, tragically, are all too often forced to make a choice between heating and eating. The resources that are provided to the vulnerable people in our communities who suffer fuel poverty should come in a variety of forms, including advice on how to save money on their energy bills throughout the year. A few months ago, I arranged an event to bring together a number of energy advice services and communities in Glasgow. The event was arranged with the Glasgow home energy advice team—G-HEAT—which was established to provide independent advice on energy-related issues to home owners and tenants, with the aim of reducing consumption and costs. Such positive action is necessary in the campaign against fuel poverty and empowers people to take action against the multinational energy companies that have exploited our communities for too long. However, such an approach will be effective only with continuing and genuine support from the Government, which has yet to explain its decision to cut the fund that was intended to tackle the growing and serious issue of fuel poverty. I hope that we can achieve the target to eradicate fuel poverty by 2016, but it is increasingly clear that the action that is required if we are to do so has not yet been taken. That means that hundreds of thousands of Scots continue to suffer from the disgraceful and exploitative business practices of the big six energy firms in the UK.

The spend in 2011-12 was £53 million. It was cut from 2010-11, from £67.3 million.

First, I give a warm welcome to the Parliament tonight to the Leprosy Mission Scotland, which is based in Stirling. I am delighted to contribute to this debate on the work of charities tackling the disease of leprosy. I thank Bruce Crawford for securing parliamentary time to recognise the importance of world leprosy day, which is to be held on 27 January 2013. Leprosy is a debilitating disease that affects the lives of millions of people all over the world and devastates families who have no access to the appropriate medical treatment. Developments in modern medicine have allowed sufferers of leprosy to be cured entirely, though tragically the medical resources are too often unavailable in the areas where the disease is most prevalent. Communities across the developing world are hardest hit by leprosy, which is usually a cause of extreme poverty and, if left untreated, can reduce the lifespan of a sufferer by up to 50 per cent. The Leprosy Mission has worked to tackle the misunderstanding and stigma associated with leprosy and has raised awareness of the plight of millions of people worldwide who continue to suffer from the disease. The world leprosy day event will provide another platform to increase the profile of the disease and potentially secure the kind of resources that would make a difference to those without access to medical treatment or even the knowledge that the disease is curable. The Leprosy Mission Scotland works internationally across 30 countries from Africa to Asia and in many nations in between, with the goal of eradicating the causes and consequences of leprosy. Volunteers here in Scotland have recognised the devastating effect that the disease continues to have in the 21st century. I am sure that the entire Parliament would join me in recognising the importance of those efforts as part of the wider action to tackle poverty and disadvantage in developing nations. The prevalence of leprosy represents more than the disease itself. It highlights the extreme poverty that so many people in developing nations endure, without access to appropriate medical or financial support—even in the most pressing times of need. It is entirely unacceptable that so many individuals should suffer from curable diseases in the 21st century and it is tragic that that suffering is compounded by the misunderstanding and stigma that still surround leprosy worldwide. Through the proper support and recognition of movements such as the Leprosy Mission Scotland, the international community can make a real impact on that unnecessary suffering. Once again, I commend the efforts of all the activists and volunteers who have raised the profile of the disease, here in Scotland and across the world.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this members’ business debate on safer social networking for children and I thank Alex Johnstone for securing the opportunity to consider such a serious issue of our time. I was shocked to discover from statistics that the number of young people who have fallen victim to cyber-bullies in recent years is not only alarmingly high, but is increasing. That form of bullying can have a devastating effect on a child’s wellbeing and can lead to depression and anxiety. I have been troubled to hear that, in some extreme cases, young people have taken their own lives. As the mother of three children, I identify with the concern of parents and carers that their children could be at risk of being targeted through emails, texts or social networking websites. It is crucial that we help to raise awareness of cyber-bullying among those who look after children, so that they are aware of potential signs of bullying via texts or the internet. As do my colleagues who have spoken, I commend the work of respectme in its most recent anti-cyber-bullying campaign, which offered advice on how to handle cyber-bullies. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government is represented on the United Kingdom Council for Child Internet Safety, which discusses cyber-bullying along with other aspects of internet safety. In a survey of more than 2,500 young people by BeatBullying, 50 per cent of those who were questioned said that they had been cyber-bullied and—worryingly—29 per cent had told no one about being cyber-bullied. Parents and carers must look closely at the online activity in which their children engage. Children 1st has an excellent “Twelve Top Tips” guide that is definitely worth reading and which is available on its website as part of its “See. Hear. Speak. Act on sexual abuse” campaign to protect children. BigAmbition Scotland states that if a teenager or young person perpetrates cyber-bullying, it is common for them to lose their internet service provider or instant messaging account for violation or misuse of the service. It is important to consider that point. I want to highlight, too, Glasgow City Council’s efforts on its anti-bullying policy, which now requires all discriminatory behaviours in education establishments to be recorded and reported. To recognise that online bullying can be just as harmful as bullying in the playground is a step towards dealing with the issue and helping to prevent it. It is a joy to hear of young people leading the way in combating cyber-bullying, as in the case of children in Gallowhill primary school in Renfrewshire, who set up a social enterprise called Support Me, through the social enterprise and skills programme. That anti-cyber-bullying business has been so successful that it has won an award for its workshops. I believe that that example shows that the issue must be tackled by adults and children working together. We need to encourage and give credit to all campaigns that attempt to make the internet a safer place for children. In raising awareness in that way, we can try to limit the detrimental effect that the internet can have on young people in our communities.

I welcome the opportunity to discuss the Scottish Government’s proposals on planning reform and I am keen to contribute to the debate on ensuring an efficient, fair and transparent planning system for local authorities, developers and the communities that they serve. As the planning minister Derek Mackay has recognised, the Planning etc (Scotland) Act 2006 was a significant improvement in the planning process, which has proven to work well for local government and developers alike. I agree that we should continue to review the planning process in order to create the best system possible for all key parties. However, I remind Mr Mackay that it is important to recognise the successes of the current legislation alongside the ambition to ensure that the guidance and process is as effective as possible for future planning applications. It is fair to assert that planning fees are an important part of the way in which local government funds its planning processes, and that any reform of that aspect of the system must be conducted with particularly careful consideration, given the extremely challenging economic circumstances of local government in Scotland. As a former member of Glasgow City Council, I understand the importance of the planning fees in delivering a timeous and efficient applications process for builders and communities. Any threat of back-door cuts to those fees would seriously damage the ability of local government to achieve those aims. The planning minister has expressed the view that he will be “streamlining the planning system, removing the need for planning applications for ... smaller developments”. Although I agree that it is important that we encourage economic growth and development by cutting unnecessary red tape in the planning process, I do not believe that that should be at the expense of communities having a say in the development of their local areas. I hope that the minister will be mindful, in making his proposals, of the unintended consequences that that could bring and that he will ensure that there are clear and strict limits on what buildings and structures can be erected without the need for a planning application. Local government has a high burden of responsibility in ensuring that applications are dealt with swiftly and appropriately, with key stakeholders being consulted at every stage of the planning process. That is why the Scottish Government must ensure that a high level of support and information is provided to accompany any change in the planning process, so that there is clarity and consistency in dealing with applications across all of Scotland’s 32 local authorities. That support will have to be accompanied by the appropriate financial assistance to implement the changes and train staff in the new procedures and requirements of the process. The impact of the cuts on local government should not be underestimated. As departments in councils across Scotland struggle to maintain their current commitments and responsibilities, any reform to current procedures must be accompanied by strong support and assistance from the Scottish Government.

We always welcome extra additions to our local authorities. Any reform to current procedures must be accompanied by additional support, which the minister has talked about. However, as John Pentland mentioned earlier, we must ensure that that is cost effective if we are to ensure that there is a win-win situation and that local government is not affected to its detriment. It is right that we continue to consider ways of evolving the planning process, but the values of fairness, transparency and community accountability must always be at the forefront of the proposals.

I am delighted to contribute to this debate on the Scottish coal industry’s importance to the wider Scottish economy, and I thank Adam Ingram for securing it. In the face of new and emerging technologies, coal’s importance as an energy source can often be forgotten or marginalised. However, as the motion states, more than 4,000 people are directly or indirectly employed in an industry that contributes an annual £450 million to the Scottish economy. Many areas of Scotland have a strong mining legacy, if not an active workforce who remain employed in an industry that has existed here since the 12th century. Many of us in the chamber will have family members in the industry, or will have been born or brought up in mining villages; indeed, I come all the way from Moodiesburn in the North Lanarkshire Council area. When I was speaking to colleagues yesterday, I mentioned the Auchengeich mine—I am sure they thought I was swearing at them. I am sad to say that I am not a coal miner’s daughter, but I nearly am and I certainly understand the sense of community that comes from being part of a Scottish mining family. Alongside the value of the industry to Scotland, the culture of mining families and communities has greatly benefited towns and villages across the country and has encouraged generations to work together for the wider community’s benefit. For example, the Scottish Coal Industry Special Welfare Fund is an independent charity that provides financial assistance to vulnerable people who have connections to the mining industry. The scheme awards grants to former miners or their family members in times of hardship, and it dispenses funds that are reserved for community groups that provide services to those who have mining connections or associations with the coal industry. That is just one example of the many schemes that were established to support Scotland’s coal industry, and it serves to illustrate the importance that the mining industry continues to command within villages, towns and cities across Scotland. It is clear that Scotland’s coal industry deserves continued support and recognition from the Scottish Government, given its relevance and value to our nation in a number of different ways. Although it is important that we deliver cleaner and more sustainable ways of producing energy in the future, we know that coal will continue to play a significant role in producing energy for decades to come, and that Scotland will be able to rely on the substantial benefit that it brings to our economy through these challenging times. I hope that the Scottish Government will fully recognise the value that the sector has not just for those who are employed in the industry, but for those who benefit from the charitable values and community spirit that are characteristic of our mining communities.

Violence against women is too often a hidden problem in Scottish society, and the work of campaigns to promote zero tolerance of domestic, sexual and physical abuse is invaluable in the wider effort to tackle sexism and promote a fairer and safer society. I thank Malcolm Chisholm for bringing the debate to the chamber to celebrate the progress that has been made as a result of 20 years of zero tolerance campaigning, and for the opportunity to highlight the needless suffering of women throughout Scotland who continue to face intimidation, violence and isolation on a daily basis. In Glasgow’s Drumchapel area, the first Scottish Women’s Aid centre to be based within a residential scheme was established to assist women and families who suffer from domestic abuse. It is the only such service in Scotland that operates 24-7 and it currently provides crucial support to more than 40 families every year. That resource, with the support of volunteers and community activists, provides women and children with a safe place in which to secure long-term accommodation, receive medical treatment, and build better lives away from abusive partners and destructive relationships. Every woman in Scotland should have access to the standard of services and the quality of resources that are provided by Women’s Aid in Drumchapel, and after 20 years of zero tolerance campaigning it is not acceptable for abuse victims to be subject to a postcode lottery of crisis services that are dependent only on the resourcing of domestic abuse services in their area. The work of the domestic abuse court in Glasgow has also improved the circumstances of many women who are in the process of exiting abusive relationships by speeding up the process of bringing justice to the perpetrators of abuse. The specialised process results in a conviction rate of about 85 per cent, compared to only 50 per cent for cases that are dealt with through the ordinary procedure of the sheriff court. That is due in part to the work of the ASSIST—advocacy, support, safety, information services together—project, which works with abused women across Scotland to ensure that they are informed and supported through the criminal justice process. The service is operated by Glasgow City Council and is independent of the criminal process, and works with victims before, during and after the criminal trial. Sadly, many of the organisations and projects that support the work of Scottish Women’s Aid centres across Scotland are already under threat of closure and cannot rely on having consistent funding from local Government, following severe budget cuts. Glasgow City Council alone will absorb a £153 million reduction to its budget over the next two years, which means that community organisations that were established to support victims of domestic abuse and sexual assault are at risk of cuts to resources, which will result in poorer services for the victims with whom they work. Only through proper resourcing and unqualified support of grass-roots advocacy organisations can we make the zero tolerance campaigns truly effective, and show that Scotland does not and will not tolerate physical, sexual or psychological abuse against women.

I am delighted to contribute to the debate on the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games and I join other members in congratulating the organisers and supporters on the fantastic progress that has been made. I am a proud Glaswegian, so I look forward to welcoming athletes and supporters from all over the Commonwealth to the city. I firmly believe that the event provides a unique and special opportunity to showcase not just Glasgow but all Scotland to the rest of the world. I spoke recently in the Parliament about preparations for the 2014 Commonwealth games and the hard work that is being undertaken by staff and volunteers to ensure that the event is an international success. At that time, organisers had begun advertising for thousands of volunteers to assist during the games, in a variety of roles. More than 40,000 people from all over the United Kingdom registered an interest in taking part in that way. Throughout Glasgow and further afield there is huge enthusiasm for becoming a 2014 volunteer and part of the legacy of Glasgow’s Commonwealth games. If we further promote the opportunities that the games bring to Scotland, we can ensure not just that we have more volunteers to staff our venues and arenas but that there is a far greater impact on families throughout the country, because so many people will have a son, daughter, friend or cousin who took part in the summer of 2014. Such awareness brings clear benefits to Scotland. Shared experience in and enthusiasm for the Commonwealth games can bring communities together. I support the work that is going on to ensure that there is a strong legacy after the games have concluded, and I commend the excellent work of Glasgow City Council and partner organisations in making that a reality. Creative Scotland and Glasgow Life recently launched a £4 million fund, which is open to community-based organisations and individuals in the months leading up to the international sporting event. The money is intended to support the build-up to the games and will be awarded to projects that involve the whole community in cultural and artistic opportunities. Awards will range from £20,000 to £300,000 and will support groups that are best placed to generate enthusiasm and excitement for one of the most important events ever to come to Scotland. I believe that communities in Glasgow and across Scotland will benefit hugely from the Commonwealth games. The impact of the games could last for generations and it falls to us to secure the benefits for our children and our grandchildren to enjoy. The work that is already under way will have made a significant impact on the success of Glasgow 2014 and I look forward with anticipation to the outcome of the years of hard work from organisers, volunteers and athletes alike.

I welcome the opportunity to discuss the important contribution that migrants make to Scotland’s unique social and cultural identity. I thank Christina McKelvie for securing time for a debate to celebrate international migrants’ rights day, which is held on 18 December annually. I wish her a speedy recovery and thank Sandra White for stepping in as cover. I am confident that the majority of us will have been personally affected in some way by those who have moved from other nations to settle here in Scotland. I know that, in my region of Glasgow, a huge number of individuals have a family history that extends far beyond the boundaries of Scotland or even the UK, and they are proud of their truly international roots. Historically, Glasgow has been home to many Irish immigrants, who sought refuge in times of hardship at home and have regarded Glasgow, along with many other parts of our nation, as their home ever since. Today we can draw parallels between Irish immigration in previous generations and the more recent arrival of those from eastern Europe, from nations such as Poland, who have already made a profound and lasting impact on Scottish culture and identity. Scottish people are no strangers to welcoming those from other parts of the world to our country. Our historical experiences of the benefit that that brings to our communities has, I believe, made us a far more open and inclusive society. I celebrate the valuable role of immigration in Scotland by attending the West of Scotland Regional Equality Council—known as WSREC—and supporting local groups to challenge discrimination and stigma in their communities. Alongside my colleague Hanzala Malik MSP, I am fortunate to be involved as a board member of WSREC and take part in grass-roots campaigns to end racial segregation and promote diversity, particularly with young people across Glasgow and the west of Scotland. My work with the cross-party group on Poland has enabled me to take part in crucial work to build links between ethnic groups and to understand better the type of issues that immigrants who live and work in Scotland may face. Members of the cross-party group have invited professionals from a range of sectors to contribute to discussions on racial integration, and, through those discussions, we are able to co-ordinate cultural events and opportunities that break down barriers in communities. The cross-party group is currently planning some key partnership working with outside agencies and groups such as WSREC, and intends to further integrate support and advocacy services for Polish people living in Scotland. Migrants’ rights day is about celebrating the invaluable contribution that those from other nations make to the countries in which they settle. It also presents an important platform from which to tackle issues of racism and discrimination in our communities. Although I believe that Scotland is an open and tolerant society in which differences are celebrated and enjoyed, I also acknowledge that there remains an uncomfortable level of prejudice and misconception around immigration that must be tackled. Through community activism and engagement, we can continue to make significant progress in the campaign against racial and ethnic discrimination, and we can illustrate to the generation of tomorrow the profound importance of immigration and the cultural diversity that it brings to the whole of Scottish society.

I am delighted to take part in this key debate on the outcomes of the UN climate change negotiations, and I welcome the opportunity for members in the chamber to consider carefully the impact of the international agreements in a distinctly Scottish context. It is clear that the serious environmental challenges that we now face must be tackled by means of international co-operation, and that politicians must work together across borders in the interests of curtailing the devastating effects of climate change and global warming. There is not a nation on earth that remains unaffected by those profound changes in our environments. It is therefore the responsibility of Governments to ensure the domestic implementation of international agreements, and the responsibility of Parliaments to hold their Governments to account for meeting those targets and delivering an effective climate change strategy. It is therefore with regret that I acknowledge the Scottish Government’s failure to meet its own statutory targets in the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, which means that greenhouse gas emissions continue to exceed the levels necessary to achieve the overall aim of reducing emissions by 42 per cent by 2020. WWF Scotland has noted that emissions from homes and transport remain at a higher and more serious level than in 1990. That is not indicative of a successful climate change strategy, and it is now clear that much more needs to be done to ensure that the 2009 act does not become an uncomfortable reminder of an ambition long ago abandoned by the Scottish Government. In October this year, I enjoyed meeting climate change activists for the get your act together mass lobby in the Scottish Parliament, which called on the Scottish Government to do more to meet the targets set out in the 2009 act. Many of the activists whom I met had been involved in the original campaign to introduce the Climate Change (Scotland) Bill and were committed to ensuring that the Scottish Government recognises the scale of the challenge and the urgency of the issues that climate change has brought to Scotland, the UK and the international community. Many of those activists also felt that the outcomes of the UN negotiations in Doha were disappointing and did not respond sufficiently to the real and increasing human costs of climate change and global warming that are becoming increasingly evident across every nation and in every continent of the globe. Although I welcome the decision to extend the life of the Kyoto protocol until 2020, I share the concerns of many campaigners that, in isolation, that may not be enough to make the kind of impact that is now necessary and unavoidable if we are to respond effectively to the real human costs of global warming and climate change.

I am delighted to contribute to this debate on the Camphill movement in Scotland, and I thank Alison McInnes for securing time in the chamber to highlight the valuable work that Camphill and its many volunteers and staff undertake. I also welcome the Camphill staff who are in the gallery. As we have heard, Camphill is an international organisation that supports people who have mental and physical disabilities, and helps people of all ages with additional support needs to live full and active lives in their communities. In Scotland, Camphill works in 12 areas. Although there are no current operations in my region—Glasgow—I know that Camphill has built a strong reputation across the country as an inclusive and dynamic organisation that provides benefits not only for those with whom it works directly, but for the wider communities in which it operates. Although Camphill has a dedicated and talented staff team, it is fortunate in that it is also supported by a team of active volunteers who undertake a variety of roles in the charity. Those volunteers provide crucial support to full-time staff members and help to increase the quality of life for Camphill residents across the 12 centres in Scotland. I am sure that the contribution of those volunteers has been instrumental in the recent positive assessment of Camphill by Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland, which found that the centres are performing well for their residents and, in particular, are providing a high-quality staffing and leadership structure for all staff and volunteers. That is an excellent result for the charity. It rightly recognises Camphill as a first-class provider of care for people who have additional physical and mental health needs. However, it is my view that no disabled person should receive lower-quality care simply because of where they live. More needs to be done to replicate models of best practice like Camphill in other areas of Scotland—particularly in Glasgow. It is a sad reality that caring for people who have additional needs is a costly and often complex process in which no one-size-fits-all approach can be adopted. Therefore, we should seek to learn from examples of organisations that are meeting the needs of those whom they support and inspire, in order to ensure the same standards and approaches throughout the country, irrespective of whether the provider is public, private or charitable.

What impact will the transfer of financial resources and responsibilities to Scotland’s new police and fire services have on local government budget settlements? Furthermore, how will the Scottish Government ensure that any initial or subsequent adjustments to the figures are redistributed in a way that is transparent and accountable both to local government and to residents and businesses across Scotland’s 32 local authorities?

5. To ask the Scottish Government, further to the First Minister’s meeting with the Chinese ambassador to the United Kingdom in June 2012, what representations it has made to China regarding the treatment of the Tibetan people. (S4O-01500)

The minister will be aware of the recent and increasing instances of self-immolation as a form of protest in Tibet and will recognise how tragic the consequences of that have been for the families of those who have died in the struggle against Chinese oppression. Does the Scottish Government intend to raise the issues of Tibet and Chinese human rights abuses in any future meetings with the Chinese Government and officials? Will the Scottish Government make representations to the United Kingdom Government and ask it to apply diplomatic pressure in order to avoid the tragic consequences that the people of Tibet have become all too familiar with?

I am delighted to contribute to this important debate on business tourism, and I thank Fergus Ewing for securing time for us to raise some of the key issues to do with visitor numbers and the economic benefits that business tourists can bring to Scotland. I begin by highlighting the excellent record of Glasgow City Council in attracting corporate and commercial visitors to our city. Glasgow regularly hosts national and international conferences and has gained a strong reputation as a city that means business. As I am sure that all members will be aware, Glasgow has secured the position of number 1 destination for business tourism in the UK outside London. That is due in no small part to the council’s support for the tourism sector in Glasgow and the vision and foresight of the Labour administration in attracting and sustaining investment. In particular, our hospitality sector has enjoyed expansion as a result of a high level of support from the council. New hotels and guest houses have been well supported in attracting business and leisure tourists to Scotland’s largest city. Those new businesses have been instrumental in delivering new jobs for Glasgow’s young people and have proved to be resilient in an otherwise struggling economic reality. Glasgow benefits hugely from the business tourism sector in Scotland, but we know that other major cities such as Edinburgh, Dundee and Aberdeen can attribute a significant proportion of inward investment to the facilitation of conferences, international meetings, conventions and exhibitions. Part of the reason for that is the broad range of facilities that our major Scottish cities can offer business tourists, in the form of conference centres, well-equipped meeting spaces, theatres and galleries. Equally, international visitors require a well-developed transport network that links city centres, train stations, business centres and airports efficiently and without unnecessary delays, and which does not result in them incurring unnecessary costs. That is why l believe that investment in transport infrastructure is the key factor in achieving further growth in the important business tourism sector and must be a central focus of efforts to sustain the current benefit to Scotland of more than £809 million annually. Scotland must position itself as a leading player globally and a destination that can compete with other UK and international cities that may also be well placed to deliver for the business tourist and their needs.

I sure do acknowledge that and congratulate Mr Robertson on it. It is clear that, to realise our ambition, we must build transport links for our visitors that are faster, cheaper and more efficient. We must focus on connecting travel hubs with our city centres and on building a comprehensive network and onward connections so that many of our towns and cities can benefit from high visitor numbers to Scotland. It is incredibly frustrating that the process has been so significantly inhibited by the Scottish National Party’s decision to cancel the Glasgow airport rail link and it is disappointing that there are no plans to re-establish the proposals for that scheme. Now is the time for the Scottish Government to boost the tourism sector in Scotland by looking again at the transport networks that service our visitors and for it to start planning for the future in terms of how we will deliver a first-class service for all of Scotland’s business and leisure tourists. The Scottish tourism sector employs more than 200,000 people across the country and indirectly supports many more of our businesses through increased spending and visitor numbers in our towns and cities. In a highly competitive marketplace, Scotland must now do all that it can to support tourism and sustain the businesses and families that rely on the strength of the industry. In particular, business tourism can offer unique opportunities for the Scottish economy in bringing high numbers of individuals to Scotland to enjoy our unique facilities and resources and to promote Scotland as a first-class business destination worldwide.

I thank Liz Smith for bringing the debate to the chamber. I am pleased to have the opportunity to represent the concerns of many students in Glasgow about funding and support for access to further education. For so many young people, a college education is both an opportunity to develop key life skills and a route into employment. With one in four young people out of work, it is important that we offer college courses that are relevant to their future working lives and access routes that enable people from all backgrounds to achieve their educational goals. Tragically, the Scottish Government is making it harder for young people to progress into further education by cutting college budgets, and it is penalising those—such as mothers and young carers—who require more flexible part-time studies by charging them to access those courses. The recent Audit Scotland report noted a 24 per cent cut in college budgets over the spending review period, and it is simply disingenuous of the cabinet secretary to claim that that will result in anything but fewer places for applicants from the most disadvantaged of backgrounds. Only a few weeks ago, the cabinet secretary claimed that there were no waiting lists for college places in Scotland. He boasted that that information did not exist because there were still spaces left for applicants to further education. Only a week later, The Herald was able to establish that more than 21,000 individuals are on waiting lists and, subsequently, are without a place on a course of their choice.

If the cabinet secretary is saying that the figure of more than 21,000 is not to be relied on, he should note that the specific figure in the article was 21,548. The cabinet secretary also said that “the concept of waiting lists ... is utterly false.”—[Official Report, 24 October 2012; c 12504.] Those are the cabinet secretary’s words.

I will continue, Presiding Officer. This is the reality of the Scottish Government’s savage cuts to the further education sector in Scotland. Another concerning consequence of the Scottish Government’s attack on colleges is the falling numbers of female students, who often rely on the availability of evening and weekend courses to balance family commitments and responsibilities. The Scottish Government is not supporting those courses and, as a result, women are disproportionately affected—and too often excluded altogether. In a time of economic hardship when 25 per cent of young people are without employment, it is unbelievable that student numbers should have fallen by 70,000 in just two years. The cabinet secretary cannot explain why that has happened, but it is clear that his campaign of cuts against the further education sector is the source of that disastrous reality. Colleges are continuing to struggle against the challenges that they now face by implementing programmes to widen access and engage with their communities but, without proper support from the Scottish Government, the effects will be sadly limited. Our further education sector has the potential to provide those from deprived and disadvantaged backgrounds with a high standard of education and equip them for future employment. However, as a result of poor resourcing, colleges are unable to provide the level of support and access to which they aspire. I ask the Scottish Government and the cabinet secretary seriously to consider re-evaluating their policies on the funding of further education, and to talk to the students and colleges in order to address the serious failings in the support that the Government is providing.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to offer access to training and education to the 21,280 people reported in The Herald on 27 October 2012 as being on college waiting lists. (S4O-01449)

I understand that the cabinet secretary has been asked on several occasions to provide the Parliament with information on the number of individuals on college waiting lists. It took an article by The Herald finally to reveal the scale of the problem that we face. Despite the cabinet secretary’s protests, it is clear that such numbers are available and that thousands are being left without access to further education each year. Cabinet secretary, how could you let this happen?

I am delighted to contribute to the debate on the 2014 Commonwealth games and I thank John Mason for bringing to the chamber the issues of Glasgow’s preparation for the event and the legacy that the games will leave behind. I, too, am excited by the huge opportunities that hosting the Commonwealth games will bring to the city of Glasgow and all of Scotland. Already, we can see sport and extra-curricular activities becoming a focus for many schools and community groups. In Drumchapel, Camstradden primary school has recently been awarded a grant of £2,000 by the Big Lottery Fund, which it will use to develop sporting activities and opportunities for all their pupils. Parents, pupils and teachers worked together to secure that funding, and together they will enjoy the benefits that it will bring to the wider community in Drumchapel, and indeed to Glasgow. That is not an isolated example of the enthusiasm that is building for the Commonwealth games, and I know that many of my constituents will be keen to volunteer for the duration of the games in a variety of different roles. Organisers are now advertising more than 15,000 voluntary positions that are similar to the games makers of the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic games—and I am glad that a few members have already signed up for them. Already there has been significant interest from members of the public in being involved in the same way. I am also delighted at the preparations that are already on-going to ensure that there is a strong and meaningful legacy for Scotland after the games end. The youth legacy ambassador programme is a joint initiative by the Scottish Government, Young Scot and others that will promote the wider involvement of communities in Commonwealth games events. It will seek to host events all over Scotland to make the games of 2014 relevant to all those who want to be involved. Every local authority in Scotland has two youth legacy ambassadors who undertake the work of promoting activity and involvement in sport among their peers. Only time will tell whether the programme will be successful, but if the young people’s hard work and enthusiasm are any indication we can look beyond 2014 with optimism. I believe that communities not only in Glasgow but across Scotland will benefit hugely from the Commonwealth games. Their impact could last for generations and it falls on us to secure the benefits for our children and grandchildren. Parts of Glasgow’s east end have already been transformed by much of the new infrastructure and stadia and we must ensure that the process does not slow down or falter between now and 2014. I look forward to the Commonwealth games with anticipation, optimism and, most importantly, pride in my city of Glasgow and Scotland’s ability to host a fantastic international sporting event.

I wish a speedy recovery to Kezia Dugdale and, in her absence, I thank John Park for stepping up to the plate. As we heard earlier, Kezia Dugdale has worked tirelessly on bringing the subject for debate. The Scottish Labour Party has consistently championed the living wage, first by implementing the changes for our lowest-paid workers in local government and then by arguing for its application across the public, private and voluntary sectors. I am proud of the changes that were made by the Labour administration in Glasgow City Council, which was the first local authority to introduce the living wage of £7.20 per hour—to be increased to £7.50 per hour—for its lowest-paid employees. That wage increase directly affected 5,000 families and more than 160 businesses in the local area. The impact of that salary increase for households on basic incomes will be immeasurable. Too many families are suffering from in-work poverty; increasing basic wages to about £7.20 per hour can be the difference between meeting the monthly bills and putting food on the table, and falling deeper and deeper into debt. Despite that reality, there are some people who still argue that now is not the time to introduce this change in the basic wages of our lowest-paid staff. They argue that the economy is too fragile and too weak to sustain the added pressure on the public purse, yet it is becoming increasingly clear that low wages for workers mean that families have less to spend, and that lower spending too often results in slow growth in the economy. Therefore, I believe that the living wage is a compelling proposition, not just because of the social benefits or because of the impact that it has on the families who are the hardest hit by the recession, but because it makes economic sense. It is right to support our most vulnerable working people through these tough economic times and it is right that we boost our economy by ensuring that our wealth is in the hands of the many—not of the few. Members have already mentioned that the living wage (Scotland) bill that has been proposed by my colleague John Park MSP would be an important step forward in extending the living wage beyond the boundaries of local government and the public sector. It would also serve to change the destructive culture among some businesses of paying staff as little as possible in order to maximise profit. Alongside other key measures, the living wage has already provided working families in Scotland with financial security in difficult times, and it will continue to do so. It can be a significant contributing factor in tackling the root causes of poverty asnd disadvantage in our society.

I thank Kenny Gibson for securing the debate. I am delighted to take part in this important debate on presumed consent for organ donation in Scotland. I know that the subject is particularly sensitive and I recognise that a wide range of views are held on the proposed adoption of such a system. I acknowledge the serious and difficult circumstances that are faced by thousands of people who are currently on the waiting list for organ transplant operations. I am sure that people on all sides of the debate would agree that positive actions need to be taken urgently to address that situation. At this time, more than 600 Scottish people are on the waiting list for a transplant operation, and on average three people die each day as a result of no suitable organs being available in time. The campaign to raise awareness of the issue by NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde and the Evening Times has highlighted some of the key issues that need to be fully considered in the course of the debate, principally whether an opt-out system would result in a greater number of organs being made available for transplant and how many lives would subsequently be saved. As we heard in earlier speeches, about 40 per cent of people in Scotland have signed up to the organ donation register. That compares favourably with a number of international examples of opt-in systems that are similar to the UK model of the organ donation register. However, international examples of opt-out systems show that organ donations tend to be between 25 and 30 per cent higher under such systems, compared with systems in which individuals have to register to donate. That trend has been consistent, and it illustrates that the adoption of a new system in Scotland could play a vital role in saving lives. Recent studies of public support for organ donation have found the intention to register to be as high as 90 per cent while actual registration is as low as 25 per cent in some parts of the UK. That is strong evidence that an opt-in system could increase access for those who are unaware of the current process and encourage greater awareness of the impact that organ donation can have. I believe that many more Scots than are currently on the organ donor list would be in favour of registering. They might have not registered only as a result of a lack of information or the time constraints that are involved in their leading busy and active lives. The comparatively high percentage who have already registered as donors suggests that our population is receptive to the idea of organ donation and that many more would be comfortable with being added to the list of potential donors in the future. Although I support the adoption of an opt-out process and believe that the benefits of such a system would outweigh the administrative challenges of its operation, it would have to be accompanied by high-quality and readily available information on how to opt out. It would be unacceptable to have large numbers of people registered as donors who would be unhappy with that arrangement, and it would be unacceptable to cause unnecessary distress to families after the death of a loved one. That is why the process of opting out should be made simple and patients should routinely be asked for their continued consent at all available opportunities. It is clear that we have a crisis in organ donation in Scotland and tough decisions have to be made to rectify that devastating reality. An opt-out system would act as a prompt for those who are in favour of registering to have the process completed for them, and many lives would undoubtedly be saved as a result.

I believe that the proposed 90 per cent rate for unoccupied properties should be reduced to 50 per cent for public bodies such as local authorities and health boards. The restriction on the level of increase is necessary to protect taxpayers and the quality of services provided by the public sector. I am sure that the Scottish Government is well aware that all public bodies are struggling to meet the increasing demands of those whom they work to support at a time of shrinking budgets and scarce resources. Asking public bodies to fund such a substantial jump in rates is clearly detrimental to our public services and it obstructs the long-term planning for currently unoccupied estates. Simply because buildings are not in current use does not mean that they will always be unoccupied, nor that they should be sold to private developers or demolished to avoid a serious increase in rates payable.

Yes. Amendment 7 objects to the doubling in the council tax that is payable on unoccupied residential property. Many families find themselves in such a situation as a result of unforeseen inheritances or because they cannot sell their home in an increasingly difficult property market. To ask people in that situation to pay twice the amount of council tax that they may have expected to pay is not only irresponsible but plainly wrong. The Scottish Government will potentially force Scottish families into negative equity as a result of these measures and the subsequent pressure to sell property to avoid the increased council tax charges. I move amendment 6.

I refer to my previous speech on the proposals and conclude that, as it stands, the bill penalises families in difficult situations and weakens the ability of many public bodies to make their own decisions about financial planning and property reallocation. I therefore press amendment 6.

I want to express my concerns on the challenging process and the questionable content of the bill. As a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, I have been involved with the progress of this bill from its inception, and I have consistently been disappointed by the lack of compromise on the part of the Scottish National Party Government at each stage. Not one Labour amendment has been accepted during the process. With more than 100,000 empty properties in Scotland, I recognise that there is a serious issue and that the regeneration of these buildings must be a priority. High streets and city centres are too often blighted by derelict buildings, unoccupied properties and abandoned offices. That must be addressed, and I encourage the Scottish Government to invest in our town and city centres in order to tackle that growing problem. However, a principal aim of the bill is to encourage economic growth and allow our local communities and small businesses to develop. How can that be achieved when councils across Scotland are telling the Scottish Government that they will have to demolish buildings in order to survive the economic implications of this ill-considered bill? In such a challenging economic environment, the Scottish Government’s proposals fail to take into account the many public bodies that will have either to sell off or to pull down buildings simply to maintain current budgets. The proposals also fail to consider the negative impact that the measures will have on future planning processes, where buildings have been designated for long-term reallocations. Local authorities, health bodies and other public bodies are deeply concerned by the uncertainty and unnecessary challenges that the measures contained within the bill will bring. Despite that, the Scottish Government continues to claim that the bill will have a positive impact on our fragile economy and somehow encourage growth in our town and city centres. The bizarre belief that charging small businesses and public bodies more for disused buildings will result in fewer unoccupied properties is both misinformed and unfounded. The assertion that the measures will generate much-needed funds for the public purse is shamefully short-sighted, given that the Scottish Property Federation has estimated that around 20 per cent of the additional revenue generated by the bill will come directly from public bodies. The Scottish Government has consistently sidelined the concerns of public bodies, small business owners and town planners. It is shameful that there has been such poor-quality dialogue and discussion from the SNP Government and, if passed, the bill will be poorer and substantially less effective as a direct result.

I am delighted to speak on the important subject of winter resilience and to have the opportunity to represent the many concerns of my constituents in Glasgow. In recent years, we have seen at first hand the importance of having a strong and resilient transport network in challenging weather conditions and we have seen the need for effective management of the resources that are designed to deal with adverse circumstances. Slow and inefficient responses from the Scottish Government to severe weather lead not just to frustration and delay for commuters but to potential isolation and loneliness for some of the most vulnerable people in our communities. For too many people, winter means taking difficult decisions about household incomes. It is unacceptable that any of my constituents should be forced to choose between heating their homes and putting food on the table but, tragically, that will be a daily reality for an increasing number of families. If the Scottish Government fails to respond swiftly and effectively to failures in our transport network, we risk damaging any fragile economic recovery that our small businesses, employers and employees and their families across Scotland are counting on. The challenges for employers are great enough without the added financial pressure of vehicles that cannot be used, employees who cannot attend work and suppliers that cannot deliver. That is why the debate concerns much more than cancelled trains and delayed journeys. Scotland needs a Government that recognises the huge range of issues that directly impact families over the winter months and a Government that adopts a proactive approach to supporting communities in that difficult period. A key issue for many of my constituents in Glasgow is the increasingly high cost of energy bills at a time when many household incomes are overstretched. Many older people who are isolated and have low incomes are being exploited by the pricing structures of the big six energy companies that operate in the UK. Customers who remain with one company for long periods are being substantially overcharged for energy supplies in comparison with new customers who have moved from a competitor. Too often, vulnerable and older people suffer the most from that disgraceful business practice, as they are the least likely to have access to the information and support to make informed choices about their energy supply and costs. I commend the action of many of my colleagues in the Labour Party in working to promote the switch together initiative, which is helping many overstretched families and vulnerable people in our communities. In Dundee, our Labour MSP Jenny Marra is championing a collective approach to rising energy costs, to drive down prices by negotiating tariffs on behalf of thousands of ordinary customers and achieve far more competitive pricing as a result. We in the Labour Party believe that “by the strength of our common endeavour we achieve more than we achieve alone”, and that opportunity allows ordinary people to have the kind of bargaining power that could make a real difference to household budgets over the difficult winter months. It is time for the Scottish Government to learn a lesson from the Scottish Labour Party and work with us to deliver innovative and dynamic solutions to the tough realities of supporting Scotland in the current challenging economic circumstances. My constituents in Glasgow deserve a consistent and effective response to severe winter weather and its effects on transport links and infrastructure. More fundamentally, they deserve a Scottish Government that fully addresses the wide range of issues that affect families and vulnerable people who live alone during the winter. I will continue to campaign for those who suffer from fuel poverty, who have to make the tragic choice on a daily basis between heating and eating. Finally, I encourage the Scottish Government to invest in and work with organisations such as Energy Action Scotland in order to support families and individuals with ever-shrinking household incomes to make smart choices about their energy supplies. Citizens Advice Scotland, which was mentioned earlier, is working with Scottish communities to provide useful and impartial advice on energy consumption and on how to find the best deals. In the past year alone, CAS has noted a rise in the number of people who struggle to make their payments during the winter. That is simply not good enough. The Scottish Government should support the Scottish people in their struggles during the winter instead of cutting local government budgets, which are already so overstretched. It is only through the full and unqualified resourcing of voluntary organisations and community groups that we can minimise the effects of severe winter weather alongside our unfortunate economic reality.

How much of a reduction does the Scottish Government grant to local authorities represent?

I join David Torrance in congratulating the 5th Fife scout group Kirkcaldy on their achievement in becoming Scotland’s national camping champions 2012. I, too, welcome them to the public gallery. I am confident that I speak for the entire Parliament when I recognise the invaluable contribution that the Scout Association and its many volunteers make to the lives of the young people of Scotland. In addition to working with school-age children, the Scout Association provides training and support to adult volunteers, who develop new vocational and educational skills through training courses and events. Those skills enable adult volunteers to be leaders in our communities and offer young people the chance to be part of an active and dynamic international organisation. That is a fantastic example of the lifelong learning process that all should have the opportunity to join and enjoy, and to which a well-funded voluntary sector should be able to contribute significantly. It is also a powerful illustration of the fact that education is much more than textbooks and times tables and that we have a duty to offer all young Scots excellent extra-curricular opportunities. I am humbled by the work that the 77th Glasgow (disabled) scout group does in my region. That local group gives boys and young men from the ages of eight to 25 with physical disabilities the chance to take part in outdoor adventure activities and international excursions. The vital work that the group carries out is undertaken by volunteers. The organisation employs no paid full-time or part-time staff members. One of the local volunteers there is Michael Shanks, who does an excellent job with the group. The group has no statutory funding. All its funds are raised from voluntary donations, without which the association would not exist. Given the vital role that volunteers play in the lives of young people in Scotland, it is right that such work should be fully and sustainably funded and that volunteers should never go unrecognised or be out of pocket as a result of contributing their time and energy to our communities. With the curriculum for excellence being implemented in Scottish schools, we must ensure that our children’s education is of as high a quality outside the core academic curriculum as it is within it. Part of that is supporting organisations such as the Scout Association to equip their members with the practical skills and confidence to create the community champions of tomorrow. Without proper investment in the voluntary sector and others who support extra-curricular development, the four capabilities—competent individuals, successful learners, responsible citizens and effective contributors—remain ambitious phrases with little relation to what is delivered. The current financial crisis all too often restricts opportunities for young people, but volunteers and local charities are stepping up to offer training and support in our communities, build the skills of local people and champion our economic recovery. That is why groups such as the Scout Association should be offered the Scottish Government’s support and why volunteers throughout the country should be recognised for the crucial work that they do.

In the chamber this week, there has been a great level of debate regarding employment. This issue affects the lives of more than 500,000 people in Scotland at present and it is only right that it be afforded such time and attention. On Tuesday, we had a debate about women’s employment, and it became clear that that should always be of concern to the Parliament. Women in the workplace still suffer discrimination at every level and it is our responsibility to eradicate that from society. However, as that aspect of employability has already been covered in some detail, I will talk about the problems that my region, Glasgow, faces and the strategies that are needed to help the city to cope with the economic downturn. Glasgow faces challenges in every sector of the job market. It is imperative that we have strategies in place to allow the city to cope. We know that investing in our economy and injecting cash into it will create growth and jobs, but struggling areas that we have failed to support have taken well over a generation to recover.

All jobs are more than welcome in Glasgow. We are all aware that the times have changed since the 1980s, and so has the job market. We no longer have the major industries in Glasgow, and the problem of unemployment has grown more complex. We cannot allow the mistakes of the past to be repeated. Young people were thrown on the scrap heap and others never worked again and so fell into the trap of benefits. Therefore, it is vital that we all continue to do what we can to prevent history from repeating itself. Let us take a couple of modern examples. Citizens Advice Scotland noted some time ago that rogue employers are now operating in Scotland and offering zero-hours contracts to people who are desperate for work. Their victims are mainly low-paid, low-skilled workers. Often, they are women who work part time. Youth unemployment still afflicts one young person in four in Scotland. However, it affects not only school leavers but graduates who are looking for, and failing to find, their first step on the career ladder. These are complex problems, and all politicians need to work together to find solutions for eradicating them and assisting the people who are involved. Glasgow City Council is working to combat some of the problems. It is taking notable steps to ensure that the worst effects of the recession are minimised. Those steps include local economic initiatives; using the third sector to support employment to get people back into work; ensuring that the physical regeneration of the city is used to create jobs and employment; and having an absolute commitment to eradicate youth unemployment from Glasgow. Those are all tough measures from a council that is committed to fighting unemployment. However, we know that those measures are not enough. Historically, Glasgow has a legacy of unemployment and benefit dependency. It still has an unemployment rate of 10.9 per cent, compared with only 8.2 per cent for the rest of Scotland. It needs radical solutions to enable it to flourish and reach its full potential. Greater capital investment spend on projects would have a major impact on its economy. That would kick-start the city’s construction industry, which is vital if its economy is to advance. We all want employability to improve in Scotland. Our economic future depends on that. I urge the Government to consider taking steps to assist and enable Glasgow’s economy to flourish and thereafter allow the city to avoid the issues that have blighted its past.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what involvement the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs will have with Glasgow City Council regarding the 2018 youth Olympic games under the major events strategy. (S4O-01348)

I welcome the minister to his new post. Does he agree that we need to create a positive working relationship between stakeholders and that all elected members should be involved in helping to bring the 2018 youth Olympic games to Glasgow, to build on the legacy of the 2012 Olympic games and the 2014 Commonwealth games?

I, too, welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate and I thank my colleague Hugh Henry for bringing the issue of child cruelty and neglect to the Parliament’s attention. I believe that every member in the chamber applauds the work that is undertaken by the NSPCC and by Matt Forde—who is a former colleague of mine from Glasgow City Council social work—especially around its new improving parenting, improving practice programme. However, it is every politician’s job to look to find effective ways of combating and preventing child neglect. The issue is continually misunderstood in our society. We often assume that neglect takes place only in certain types of family, and although the media will always focus on the most extreme cases, the reality is that child neglect can appear in many guises. The NSPCC’s statistics show that one person in six was neglected at some point in their childhood. It is our responsibility to identify and target children before neglect becomes an aspect of their lives. Although the results of the improving parenting, improving practice programme are pertinent to today’s debate, it is only right to note the other projects and trials that the NSPCC is undertaking in Scotland. For example, the introduction in Glasgow of the New Orleans intervention model, as a partnership between the NSPCC, Glasgow City Council and NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, has been a particular success. The model, unsurprisingly, was developed in New Orleans as a mechanism that allows professionals to assess whether children should be reunited with their birth family or placed for adoption. When the model was used in the United States, the results were startling. Children who were assessed using the model were less likely to suffer abuse or neglect when they were returned to their birth family and, conversely, more likely to settle in well with a new family. The seven-year follow-up of the 80 children who were exposed to the New Orleans intervention showed that, on virtually all mental health measures, the graduates of the intervention were similar to the general population. The hope is that the model could inform child protection decisions throughout Scotland, and I urge the minister to look at the findings from Glasgow. I am sure that we all agree that preventative measures and intervention at an early age are the key to success. Even before a child is born, its life chances are affected by its mother’s situation. Early intervention must start from the womb and not just from the cradle. The Scottish Government has taken positive steps. The introduction of the early years framework and of getting it right for every child means that we are now catching more cases of child neglect than ever before. However, as we know, Government strategy alone is not enough to combat the problem; we also need projects at the grass roots to support families. For example, Parent Network Scotland has had particular success in Glasgow and throughout Scotland—even as far as Shetland, I am led to believe. The organisation’s director is Jackie Tolland, whom I met recently and who is another former colleague of mine. The network runs support courses for struggling parents on parenting matters and to give an introduction to curriculum for excellence. The courses are flexible and are delivered in a targeted way to help parents to support one another in a school environment, while taking into account the needs of children, parents and schools. Such courses allow people to learn necessary parenting skills from their peers, without the prospect of feeling ostracised. I congratulate Parent Network Scotland on its considered approach and I urge the minister to observe the work that it undertakes. The issue is too important for members to make party-political points. We have made great strides in recent years, but we must do more. We must all work together to ensure that child neglect is eradicated from Scottish society.

I welcome the opportunity to speak on the topic of gambling as I agree with John Mason in this instance. There are far too many betting shops in Glasgow and it is clear to me that betting shops are indeed preying on the vulnerable in our society. I am seriously concerned about the number of betting shops that exist and their locations near pubs and ATMs. They are luring new customers, particularly young people, off our high streets and through their doors. Although I acknowledge that the majority of those who choose to gamble do so responsibly, gambling addiction is a problem, albeit one that is not often discussed. I commend the excellent work that organisations such as Gamblers Anonymous and the RCA Trust do in working with those who are affected by gambling addiction. I am pleased that a question on gambling was included in the latest Scottish health survey and I look forward to seeing the findings when the report is published later this year. A number of issues need to be raised regarding betting shops, including the safety of their staff. Changes in working practices have meant that lone staffing is now commonplace. Worryingly, workers can be left to work alone in betting shops for hours at a time, often early in the morning or late at night. More than 55 per cent of betting shop workers are women, so there are concerns about how appropriate lone working is for betting shops, particularly as stores that are staffed by one person are more vulnerable to attack. No one should feel frightened to go to their place of work. In 2008, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and Community, the only union that represents betting workers in all the major and independent betting shop chains in Scotland, launched a fantastic poster campaign that was geared towards eliminating violence against betting shop workers and which was highlighted in a motion lodged by my colleague John Park. The campaign achieved cross-party support and did an excellent job in raising awareness of what betting shop staff are subjected to every day. Community members’ experience suggests a direct link between increasing levels of violence and abuse in betting shops and the proliferation of FOBTs, which make up a rapidly increasing share of the profits generated by high-street bookmakers. Although official police figures suggest that violence and criminal damage in betting shops are falling, that does not reflect the daily experience of Community members and I want to share with the chamber two concerns that the union has raised. First, Community believes that police authorities are neither gathering data effectively nor recognising that betting shops form a particular usage group that ought to be monitored more closely. Secondly, we know that some major betting shop operators are systematically discouraging the reporting of incidents involving FOBT machines to the police. Two members from two of the major betting chains in Scotland have noted: “Company don’t want police involved unless staff are hurt” and “Company policy not to involve police, apparently due to low conviction rate”. Betting shop chains provide limited support for staff who have been victims of a violent robbery and many have to return to work after they are threatened with loss of sick pay. Many betting shop workers are subject to regular verbal and physical attacks. That is wholly unacceptable. We must put more pressure on betting shops operating in Scotland to provide safe environments for their workers and I believe that ending lone working in such shops is a step in the right direction.

I thank the minister for providing an advance copy of his statement. I note that there is no mention in the statement of a specific strategy for cities. Glasgow, along with other cities, is the powerhouse of Scotland’s economy and while I am pleased to note that the minister has included the 2014 Commonwealth games, the national planning framework is about not the next two years but the next 20 years. With that in mind, what action will the minister take to ensure that a specific city strategy is included in the national planning framework 3? What steps will he take to ensure a legacy of regeneration for Glasgow after the 2014 games?

I welcome the opportunity to take part in today’s debate, for which the term “the graveyard shift” springs to mind. Community empowerment and renewal go to the heart of not only my values but Labour Party values. Therefore, I relish the opportunity to speak about the good work that is being done, and the vital work that is still to be done, on that policy area. I am surprised that we are having the debate so early in the legislative process—so early that the Government has not closed the consultation. However, it is good to see that the minister is eager to discuss community empowerment and renewal. I forgive his haste and welcome his keenness and aspirational approach.

As a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, I look forward to the bill being presented to that committee. I think that it will contain much on which committee members will find consensus. However, the committee will also scrutinise the bill when necessary. I want the bill to provide real support for localism, with power being devolved to the most local levels and those local levels being resourced and funded adequately to enable that devolution. Community empowerment and renewal have risen in prominence over recent years. In 2003, one of the Labour-led coalition’s flagship bills was the Land Reform (Scotland) Bill, which, for the first time, gave communities the right to buy land in their areas. That legislation was much welcomed and went a long way in encouraging communities to buy into their own land. However, work is still needed to ensure that communities in urban areas—such as Glasgow, the area that I represent—are given the same opportunity to be enfranchised and are encouraged to find use for unused and derelict land and buildings. Since the Land Reform (Scotland) Act 2003 was passed, local people have made more than 120 applications to buy out land in their areas. We should learn the lessons from rural areas and apply them to urban areas. Throughout Scotland, there are towns and cities that have been left out of community renewal and which are in desperate need of regeneration. Therefore, it is essential that, when the Government formulates and considers the bill, it makes urban areas and areas of deprivation a priority. The Government must resist the urge to centralise and it must realise that local government is best placed to deliver the initiative. The bill should be about a localised, bottom-up approach to regeneration to allow local communities to grow and flourish. It must put in place a framework that will ensure that local people are able to access their communities. Localism must be at the heart of the bill, and the Government must find a way to work with local government to ensure that that goal is achievable. Glasgow City Council has been putting localism and Labour values into action. That process has been led by Councillor Aileen Colleran. Only last week, the council’s stalled spaces programme won top prize for community involvement at the Scottish awards for quality in planning. That programme is a community project designed to target temporarily vacant or underused land and bring it back into use. I was happy to lodge a motion in the Parliament last week congratulating the council on that achievement. The programme is a real achievement not only for the council and Glasgow but, most importantly, for the local community. It is important to highlight successful projects in the Parliament, but community projects flourish only if the Government is serious about putting stable funding and resources in place for them.

I stand corrected by Ms MacDonald. Claire Baker mentioned that if projects are set up in good faith, they can sustain themselves and do not need the same amount of funding thereafter. For the bill to be successful, there must be strong local leadership. Community development courses should be reinstated rather than cut, to allow communities to grow and be trained. There must be joined-up working between local government and the Scottish Government, and a real effort to engage communities in regeneration. There are times when communities do not feel that they are part of the decision-making processes that determine what they look like. The Scottish Government must be explicit to ensure that the bill will empower communities, rather than simply pay lip service to them. Otherwise, it will let down the communities that the bill purports to represent.

I welcome Margaret Burgess to the front bench and to her new role, in which I know that she will be a huge asset. I declare that I am a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, which reported on the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill. There are more than 100,000 empty buildings and homes in Scotland, contributing to our housing crisis and marring our town centres. We all want empty properties to be brought back into use, but there are flaws in the bill, which the Scottish Government must address before the legislation is passed. The principles displayed by the Government in its introduction of the bill are of merit. Good work is being undertaken by the Scottish Government, in partnership with Shelter Scotland, through the introduction of the Scottish empty homes partnership, which we have heard about from other members. However, it is the legislation regarding non-domestic rates that is problematic and which the Scottish Government must reconsider urgently. I wish to focus on that part of the legislation. As the bill stands, the Government has failed in its duty to look at the financial and economic implications of the legislation. Although no one wants to see unoccupied properties scarring our high streets and town centres, the bill is being introduced at the wrong time. In evidence to the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, Glasgow City Council stated that under the legislation, it would be forced to demolish buildings that it would otherwise have held on to as part of its long-term regeneration strategy The Scottish Government asserts that the introduction of the legislation will lead to savings of £18 million. I would dispute that figure, though, as the Scottish Government has not taken into account the cost of collecting rates on its own empty properties, a figure that could total as much as £1.8 million. The Scottish Property Federation estimates that at least 20 per cent of the forecasted savings will be met from the public purse, with hospitals and Government offices footing the bill.

That was before the recession—Mr Brodie forgot to add that part in. Unlike the Scottish ministers, Labour ministers exercised financial due diligence. The Government has not thought about the impact of such legislation on local government. It is estimated that the legislation will cost Glasgow City Council alone as much as £1 million—an extra levy at a time when local government is struggling to meet the financial demands that are placed on it. As an Opposition, we have been vocal about the changes that need to be made to the legislation. Only three months ago, I, along with CBI Scotland, called on the minister to complete a BRIA to strengthen the bill’s financial competency. However, the Government still refuses to take those steps. As we know, the Scottish Government has been aware of financial question marks hanging over the bill for some time. Before the bill was brought to the attention of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, it was slated by the Finance Committee for its poor attention to detail, and the committee could not support the bill’s financial memorandum. The bill is salvageable but, before stage 2 is complete, I urge the Government to look again at the issue of non-domestic rates to ensure that it is not penalising small businesses or hindering the economic recovery.

I declare at the outset that I am a member of the Local Government and Regeneration Committee, which is in the latter stages of producing its report on the Local Government Finance (Unoccupied Properties etc) (Scotland) Bill—to give it its Sunday title. We all want our towns and city centres to thrive, to be full of businesses and to provide jobs and opportunities for local people. However, there are serious concerns that these proposals will not help us to achieve that and, in some cases, might make the situation worse. Concerns of that nature should be reflected in the work on any piece of legislation and, indeed, preparations for such legislation should be comprehensive. However, as Gavin Brown’s motion makes clear, that has not been the case with regard to this bill. I am primarily concerned about the lack of a full and proper consultation process and believe that a BRIA or even a pilot study should have been carried out. It is only right to expect such preparations to be made—as is customary—but that has not happened in this case. The lack of consultation is clearly noted in the Finance Committee’s report and has been highlighted in the Local Government and Regeneration Committee’s work on the bill. Indeed, the Finance Committee’s report also notes that “no attempt” has been made “to estimate the number of commercial properties that will be brought back into use” under these proposals, a situation that the report rather diplomatically describes as “surprising”. Moreover, the figures given to the Finance Committee were based on limited information about Scottish Government properties, with no account taken of Scottish Enterprise or national health service properties. As Sarah Boyack has pointed out, some of the evidence comes from England, where such a scheme has already been put in place. As the economy has struggled, the number of unoccupied properties has risen; indeed, some properties have even been demolished and people in Glasgow whom I represent have suggested that the same might be a consequence in that city.

People in town centres are worried about this issue. Despite the fact that groups such as the Confederation of British Industry and Scottish Chambers of Commerce have indicated that, for the most part, commercial properties are not left empty deliberately, no account has been taken of the current economic climate, which has put further barriers in the way of filling such properties. Indeed, Annabel Goldie mentioned that point earlier. I know of a number of potential start-up businesses that have not received support from banks to allow them to look for new properties, and the Government should be actively pushing banks to do everything they can to support businesses in finding and funding properties. The banks are happy to take advantage of low interest rates, and the liquidity trap is allowing them to fill their vaults while properties stay empty. We should provide support to allow other properties to be modernised and redeveloped as well as penalising those who are intentionally and for their own personal gain not letting out their premises. We all want our towns and city centres to be regenerated and to flourish. However, to achieve that, we need tried and tested legislation that is built on proper preparation. Let us begin that process by getting detailed information on the number of commercial properties that will be brought back into use by these proposals.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what funding and leadership it provides to protect and maintain Charles Rennie Mackintosh buildings. (S4O-01053)

Given that it is the 144th anniversary of Rennie Mackintosh’s birth next month, does the cabinet secretary agree that the Scottish Government has a significant role to play in leading the various owners of the buildings to ensure that neither the legacy nor the constructions of one of Scotland’s most cherished architects are left to crumble?

The Welfare Reform Act 2012 was described by the Prime Minister as a revolutionary piece of legislation that would make work pay and protect the vulnerable. We were also told that the reform would help to clamp down on benefit fraudsters who take from the state what they are not entitled to. Yet, the same coalition Government has made no attempt to tackle the tax-evading companies that fail to pay billions of pounds that they owe. Protection of those companies at the expense of some of our most vulnerable groups leads me to believe that the UK Government protects the rich and lets the vulnerable pay dearly. We often hear in the chamber that the Scottish Government wants more powers for Scotland. The act provides exactly that. Attention now must be on what will be done with those powers. A huge number of questions need to be asked not for partisan political reasons, but because of what is at stake for some of our most vulnerable people. Members will be well aware that I am a proud supporter of the credit union movement. There is no doubt that credit unions will be at the front line in dealing with people as welfare reform kicks in. However, the impact and scale of the reform suggest that credit unions will be stretched to the extreme, with some possibly being unable to cope with the demands that will be placed on them by the financially excluded individuals and families who will be hardest hit by the welfare reforms. Some credit unions may not have the necessary range of products to deliver relevant services to those who are most affected by the reforms. The credit unions of Glasgow strategy group has been proactive in bringing 34 of the city’s credit unions together to co-operate and to try to ensure that they can offer the best possible services. However, in other parts of the country that is not happening. It is imperative that the vulnerable groups who turn to credit unions that may not be able to cope with the increased demand are not forced into the arms of legal loan sharks or backstreet lenders. It is important that we protect our smaller ethical financial service providers from trying to do too much for too many. Therefore, I ask the cabinet secretary what assistance the Government will provide in research and development for appropriate financial products for the people who are set to take the brunt of the reform. I also ask how the Government aims to support provision of financial advice and how it is supporting front-line organisations to work together in developing actions to mitigate the impacts of welfare reform—specifically with regard to financial products for excluded families. The bill seems to be based on a presumption that benefits will be paid into bank accounts. Therefore, what provision has been made to ensure that individuals have an appropriate bank account that will allow them to receive their benefits? Further questions also need to be addressed. Given that much of the access to the new system is expected to be online, are the individuals who are likely to be affected computer savvy or do we need to provide more computer courses? On computing, I have previously raised the fact that the Glasgow area has a poor rate of broadband take-up in low-income households, so there may also be issues about access to the internet for many of the people affected. Another unanswered question, which I have heard from a number of third sector organisations, concerns the advice that is to be given to recipients. The reform means that benefits and tax credit recipients will be looking for comprehensive advice on all forms of benefits, which are currently all quite specialist areas. The changes suggest that individuals and organisations that give advice will have to increase the breadth of topics on which they provide advice. Again, it is important for them and Parliament to know how that will be orchestrated and what support will be given to ensure that it can be done. We also need to know what the Scottish Government is doing to identify target groups, where they are located and which areas require particular types of support. Perhaps the Scottish Government’s Scottish neighbourhood statistics project could help with that. It is a great tool, which I hope the Government considers promoting. As I said earlier, there are many unanswered questions that need to be addressed. For the sake of the individuals and families who are supported by benefits contributions, I hope that the Scottish Government listens to all parties who are concerned with providing the answers that are so desperately required.

I am always glad to have the opportunity to discuss how we can improve the lives of children and young people in Scotland, and today is no different. However, it would perhaps have been more useful to have the opportunity to debate an actual parenting strategy rather than just a motion that welcomes its development. When we have a UK Government attacking public services and delivering damaging welfare reform that will impact on the lives of people throughout the country, it has to be recognised that, often, it is children and young people who are hardest hit. That, coupled with the Scottish Government’s cuts to further education and its continued broken promises on education and the falling numbers of pre-school teachers, mean that, for many people, childhood is not shaping up to be the happiest years of their lives, which is a pity.

The importance of the early years to a person’s development is now more apparent than ever. That should be reflected by action to improve children’s start in life. The SNP’s commitment to increase nursery education to 600 hours could have been part of that. However, just as with the parenting strategy, parents and children are still waiting on its delivery. That commitment could have been met quickly and simply, but instead it is held up and will be part of the forthcoming rights of children and young people bill. Thankfully, as I am sure that members will agree, Labour in Glasgow has committed to guaranteeing that every child in the city will have 15 hours of childcare a week from the age of three, which means that it is delivering more hours than the current Scottish national provision, despite the swingeing cuts that Glasgow City Council received from the Scottish Government.

My Labour colleagues in Glasgow—

—will also extend the vulnerable twos programme, which offers support to vulnerable children across the city and will focus resources on parenting support for people with children in the early years. Furthermore, another 10 family learning centres will open across the city over the next five years. All those actions will support children and young people as well as the adults who look after them and I hope that the Scottish Government will encourage other local authorities to implement similar policies. If the Scottish Government wants to make Scotland the best place in the world to grow up in, what is happening in Glasgow provides great examples of what needs to be done. However, as a parent of three children who are all at school now—I hope—I know that if we want to improve the lives of children and young people, we need to do more than deliver in the early years. Like the national parenting strategy, the forthcoming children and young people bill presents an opportunity to take forward an agenda that will improve the lives of all children, including the most vulnerable young people in our communities, which is most important. Under it, ministers will be required to have regard to children and young people’s rights and views in making policy. Although that is, of course, a step in the right direction and although I support the intention behind the proposals, I must point out that children and young people might still lose out if the proposals do not cover local authority and health board decision making. The same goes for the national parenting strategy, which must cover all areas that impact on the lives of young people and the adults who look after them. That kind of overarching approach to enhancing the lives of all Scotland’s children and young people is a must. They deserve the best life chances and we must do our bit to support that.

I applaud the Government’s work in creating the climate challenge fund. How much of the fund will be spent on plugging the gap that was created by the cuts to the active travel budget?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate, which is extremely timely. As colleagues have mentioned, only a fortnight ago, we learned that the UK has officially entered a double-dip recession. Unemployment in Scotland is at an alarming level, and youth unemployment in particular is reaching record levels. Recent statistics show that, since 2007, Scotland’s long-term youth unemployment rate has risen by more than 1,000 per cent. We know that immediate action is needed to create jobs and stimulate growth. Instead, young people across the country who have secured employment have been hit by the UK Government’s welfare reforms, which means that 16 to 20-year-olds are no longer exempt from making national insurance contributions. For those who are looking for work, there is the Scottish Government’s much-vaunted modern apprenticeship scheme. That scheme is welcome, but we must ensure that any such schemes are focused on positive outcomes.

I have been led to believe that I was not here and did not—[Interruption.]

I will carry on. It is not enough simply to repeat the 25,000 modern apprenticeships mantra, as the Scottish Government has been in the habit of doing. What do those apprenticeships consist of? What skills are taught? How long do they last? Crucially, where do they lead? Young people and their parents have raised those queries on the doorstep over the past months. Organisations such as Barnardo’s Scotland have called for a maximum waiting time for young people to get access to the opportunities for all programme. I whole-heartedly endorse that idea. To ensure that apprenticeships provide a positive destination for our young people, we must ensure that there is a clear and transparent mechanism for monitoring them. Much of the correspondence that I have had with Skills Development Scotland shows that it does not track the long-term progress of apprentices following the completion of their scheme. That must change if we are to be certain that the schemes are making the positive impact on young people’s lives that they deserve and which we expect. It would be remiss of me to omit from my speech the concerns about further education that many of my constituents have brought to my attention. More and more young people are facing a catch-22 situation. With the daunting prospect of unemployment on the one hand and swingeing cuts to local colleges on the other, they are left unable to find a job or gain a place on a college course that will equip them with marketable skills. Now, more than ever, further education has a vital role to play in Scotland’s move towards economic growth, but the Scottish Government’s cuts to the sector suggest that that has not been recognised. I note for the record that, through Labour-led Glasgow City Council, 16 to 24-year-olds will have the Glasgow guarantee of training or work. It is not just youth unemployment that is affecting Scotland. The cabinet secretary’s motion mentions many sectors that are performing well, but it does not mention the alarming rise in the rate of female unemployment in Scotland, which, like the youth unemployment rate, is higher than the UK average. As a working mother of three children, I know just how difficult it is for people to ensure that their children are looked after while they are at work. The childcare factor plays a large part in many women’s lives as they look to get back into work. The Labour Party in Glasgow has already pledged to guarantee every child in the city 15 hours of childcare from the age of three—a move that could be worth up to £1,500 for every child. I have spoken to a number of parents who are both relieved and excited by that prospect, which they feel will make a big difference to their ability to secure and maintain employment. I am pleased that Glasgow will continue to roll out employability programmes that train early years staff to help parents back into work. I urge the Government to endorse that approach and to encourage its take-up across the country. As we look to rebuild and to encourage growth, it is imperative that we base our efforts on ethical and co-operative foundations. Many parts of the social economy and many social enterprises are growing year on year. Members will be aware that 2012 is the international year of the co-operative movement, and we should be striving to expand the co-operative model, particularly in the financial sector, where a drive to support and encourage credit union membership would be a huge boost to responsible banking. Credit union membership in Glasgow has risen by more than 20 per cent. I hope that members agree with and will support Scottish Labour’s amendment.

I welcome the debate. I think that my fellow members will agree that the existing charging regimes are neither compatible with the needs and desires of ordinary people nor in the interests of delivering an affordable and sustainable energy future. In modern society, few issues are more pressing than global warming. Some might even go so far as to say that, for the future of the planet, it is even more important than the debate on Scottish independence. Members will be aware of the truly alarming figure that 900,000 households in Scotland are in fuel poverty. The importance of the debate and the independent review are therefore self-evident. There is general support among politicians and charities, such as Friends of the Earth Scotland and RSPB Scotland, for the main aims of project transmit. As Ofgem has stated, reducing carbon emissions and ensuring the delivery of secure energy supplies are integral to its duty to protect the interests of current and future energy consumers. It is this Parliament’s responsibility to build on those areas of consensus and to work towards a fairer future. Project transmit provides an opportunity to make major progress and it presents us with a chance to ensure that we find the right charging regime—one that supports renewables developments but does not do so at the expense of those who cannot afford a hike in energy bills. For many of my constituents in Glasgow, fuel poverty is a critical issue. However, it is not an issue only in Glasgow, which is why we must look to protect households in fuel poverty across the country. No one should have to choose between heating their house and feeding themselves and their family. Although project transmit affords the Scottish Government the opportunity to create and support sustainable energy developments, we must remember that altering the existing charging regime is not in itself enough. It is crucial that we give further support to the various green initiatives that exist throughout the country and set our minds to conceiving new and innovative ways to turn Scotland into an energy-efficient, low-carbon economy. In Glasgow, Labour is stepping up to that challenge. We will lead the implementation of the green deal to improve the energy efficiency of residents’ homes. We have committed to develop a centre for green building skills, which will help local workers and the construction industry to make the transition to a low-carbon economy. We have pledged to create the Glasgow energy trust to develop new energy systems and to ensure that the city gets its fair share of all future revenues. Project transmit offers an opportunity to change one part of the energy system and address a long-standing concern, but it is only one element of the change that needs to occur if we as a country are to achieve our aims and meet our obligations to the global community. At the heart of the change must be people not profits, and community benefits not corporate gains. The communities that are at the forefront of the renewables revolution should be able to reap the rewards. I am glad that Labour’s amendment takes that into account by calling on Ofgem to recognise community involvement and to introduce a pricing regime that prioritises the needs of local people and does not penalise them. I hope that all members agree, and I call on them to support Ken Macintosh’s Scottish Labour amendment.

We learned last week that the going rate for an audience with the Prime Minister is £250,000, a sum which Boris Johnson once described as “chicken feed.” That gives a startling insight into just how out of touch the Westminster Government is, so we should not really be surprised by the contents of last week’s budget. The budget pillaged the pockets of the elderly, the unemployed, the disabled and those on low incomes, so that Cameron, Clegg, Osborne and their chums in the banking and financial sectors could maintain their stocks of champagne and caviar, for the next episode of “Come Dine with Dave at Downing Street.” For the 14,000 people earning £1 million or more who are getting a tax cut of more than £40,000 each, it is “Guid yin, Gideon”. Back in the real world, a family with children that earns just £20,000 is losing £253 a year from April. That is on top of the VAT rise, which is costing a family an average of £450 per year. It hardly sounds like we are all in this together.

I am sorry, no. We know what the chancellor's budget does for those in society who are more than just better off. What about those who need some extra support in these difficult times? The Institute for Fiscal Studies has shown that the Con-Dem coalition’s policies will see an increase of 100,000 a year in the number of people in poverty across the UK. Only last month, we heard about more than 200 women a day losing their job in Scotland, at a time when female unemployment is at its highest for more than 23 years in the UK. In the past fortnight, members have had the opportunity to discuss children’s issues in the chamber, in particular childcare. The opportunity was welcomed because even before the budget was delivered, we knew what the Westminster Government was doing to the lives of thousands of children across Scotland. Attacks on working tax credits will hit hardest 4,500 children across the city of Glasgow, and pressures such as that are taking their toll on hard-working families not just in Glasgow but across the country.

I am sorry, but I have not got time. What is more, the Tory budget failed to help out those hard-working families by not tackling the rise in the price of fuel—a move that could have helped small businesses. I find it all the more galling that the chancellor billed his budget as one that rewards work when, as the Scottish Trades Union Congress stated in its budget submission, “it is now indisputable that government policy is hitting wages much harder than profits”. What are we getting in return? More people are being moved out of the tax range, but that is not a solution for people who are not in work. We need more investment in creating jobs, not tax cuts for those on the highest pay. The STUC has calculated that more than 500,000 people in Scotland are either unemployed or underemployed. For those people, tax and benefit changes do not bring new jobs. Every budget is an opportunity and last week should have been about delivering a stimulus for economic growth and job creation. Instead, the opportunity was seized to give the rich a massive tax break. George Osborne’s budget gave the rich prosperity and the rest austerity. Scottish Labour’s amendment recognises that and recognises the priorities of job creation and economic growth. I hope that all members will share those priorities at decision time by supporting our amendment.

I am glad that I have the opportunity to speak in the debate. As I said in the childcare debate last week, I am a working mother of three children and know how essential childcare is to parents and children. The opportunity to discuss its importance again is extremely welcome. I have spoken to countless parents in Glasgow, which I represent—and, for that matter, to parents throughout the country—and I know that affordable, high-quality childcare is a top priority, especially given the economic strains that are being placed on hard-working families. I have also noticed that, over the past year or two, it is becoming an economic issue for people who were previously able to manage financially. If people who were previously getting by are now struggling, what does that mean for the people who have always needed slightly more support? Last month, figures were released that showed that, in Scotland, more than 200 women a day were losing their jobs. The knock-on effect that that will have on children cannot be overestimated. In addition to that, Save the Children told us last week about working parents’ mounting concerns about the Welfare Reform Bill, which will affect almost 4,500 children in Glasgow. For any of those women who have lost their jobs and are trying to find other employment, the cost of childcare will be a massive hurdle. We know that there are worries and that there are issues that must be addressed now. That is why action must be taken straight away, not in two years’ time. Five years ago, the SNP made a similar pledge that it did not keep. That cannot be allowed to happen again so, although I and my Labour colleagues are glad that the Scottish Government intends to increase childcare provision, members will forgive us for being a little concerned about the timeframe. When I spoke in last week’s debate on childcare, I explained that the Labour-led Glasgow City Council had already introduced a raft of positive and progressive policies on childcare. It has shown the way by offering 15 hours a week of nursery provision and pledging to expand that provision to include children under the age of three. That move could benefit more than 7,000 children in Glasgow, but I do not want Glasgow’s children and parents alone to have that increased provision. Childcare should not be reduced to a postcode lottery. I want every family in Scotland to enjoy equal access to first-rate childcare. This week, we witnessed an overdue U-turn from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning on curriculum for excellence. Today, the SNP has a chance to follow in Mike Russell’s humble footsteps by addressing the concerns of parents of younger children. I read last week—this may just be a scurrilous rumour—that the SNP sent out an e-card for mother’s day. I ask it to match its fine words with actions and send a belated present to thousands of hard-working families throughout the country by supporting Scottish Labour’s motion.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to invest in cycling infrastructure to improve take-up rates of active travel. (S4O-00829)

The minister will have read Transport Scotland’s report on transport emissions, which concluded that the Government’s transport policies could lead to an additional 17 kilotonnes entering the atmosphere by 2022. Does he agree that the report makes it even more essential to have the infrastructure in place to encourage increased take-up of sustainable means of travel such as cycling?

All I can say is that the SNP has had a long time to tell that story. We are still waiting and, given what its partners in England are doing, we will still be behind. As a working mother with three children, I sincerely welcome the debate. I know all too well how difficult it is to find high-quality, affordable childcare and certainly realise how important it is not just for the kids but for their parents. Our children benefit from the early socialisation and learning that often come from being in childcare, as they can start to form relationships and have new experiences there. Parents, too, benefit from being able to allocate time for work or education. I am pleased that Liam McArthur’s motion calls on both the Scottish Government and local authorities to work to provide more access to affordable childcare. In Glasgow, where the Labour council was the first in Scotland to provide funded childcare for three-year-olds, work on that can already be seen. At the moment, children get 15 hours of such childcare a week, starting at the beginning of the term after their third birthday, and the city’s Labour council has pledged that, if—I mean, when—re-elected in May, it will expand provision to ensure a funded childcare place for every child at the start of the term in which they turn three. That move will benefit an additional 7,000 children. Such positive and progressive policies are needed more than ever, given that the cuts that are being pushed through by the coalition Government at Westminster will take thousands of pounds from working families. We are moving closer to the changes in working tax credits, and I am sure that we will all have heard the concerns that were expressed this week by Save the Children about the effect of the changes on working parents. There is no doubt that, for those families, the already difficult task of securing quality childcare will be all the more challenging. I was concerned by the comment of one Glasgow parent, who said that, as a result of the changes, “It’s a case of either heating or food—one or the other”. I find that worrying, because it shows that some families are being squeezed so much that childcare does not even feature among their priorities. Worse still, it is not only one Glasgow parent who should be concerned about these changes; in that city alone, they will directly impact on almost 4,500 children. The changes might leave working families with only two options—work more or incur debt—and I fail to see how either will help them to deal with the childcare situation. I am glad that Liam McArthur’s motion recognises a number of the issues that working families in Scotland face when it comes to childcare acquisition. Those issues need to be addressed now. However, we also need to realise the impact that benefit changes will have on our hard-working families, so I ask members to support the amendment in the name of Neil Bibby.

I rise to speak as the next member on the conveyor belt. Although I am not a member of the Health and Sport Committee, I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. After all, at the heart of the inquiry was the need to ensure that our older people have systems and structures that provide a safe and dignified life. I put on record my appreciation for the hard-working, compassionate people who care for our older people. The role that they play in the lives of many of our senior members of society should not be taken for granted. Recently, we saw the financial collapse of Southern Cross, and we all worried about the ramifications for residents and staff alike. We must ask why that situation came about. Was profit pursued ahead of care? Were residents merely customers? We must accept that the reason why our demography is changing, with people living longer lives, is massively influenced by the NHS being a public service and not a private one. We must look at ethical finance models for care services, such as mutuals and worker co-operatives, which have as their priority the care of service users, not shareholder profits. When we have an ageing population but people are not necessarily living healthy lives for longer, we need to have services for older people that we can trust. That is why it is concerning to read in the committee’s report—

That is why it is concerning to read in the committee’s report that, in some cases, residents and service users do not feel confident about contacting service providers directly to make complaints. How can we allow our older people to be cared for by businesses that they do not feel confident in speaking to? There have been worryingly similar accounts from staff about whistleblowing in the sector. We need to see a commitment to work with trade unions and employers to ensure that staff feel supported in the event that they need to report poor practice. I was pleased to see the Royal College of Nursing call for independent care providers to keep formal registers of all concerns that are raised by staff in order to increase accountability and improve practice. However, I know from my background in social work that having better whistleblowing support and complaints procedures is not enough, because concerns about complaints and whistleblowing do not usually arise without reason. If there are issues that are being complained about, we need to tackle them and not just the complaints process. Is it too much to expect staff to be properly trained and qualified in best practice in caring for our older people? Staff deserve that as much as service users do. Such training is vital as we try to reduce the high turnover of demotivated staff. On that point, I am glad that the committee supported Labour’s call for a living wage for care employees. We need to ensure that a qualified and properly remunerated workforce is properly monitored and appraised through inspections and follow-ups. With such support, it can deliver and maintain the high standards of care and support that our old people deserve.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions. (S4O-00736)

Given that the Welfare Reform Bill has now passed its final hurdle in the House of Lords, what discussions have ministers had about the impact that the bill will have on working families in Scotland, particularly those in receipt of working tax credit?

I begin by declaring an interest as an elected member of Glasgow City Council. Since joining the Local Government and Regeneration Committee at the beginning of this year, I have had the opportunity to take part in the final stages of the committee’s report on the living wage in Scotland, and I owe recognition to my colleagues, Mark Griffin and Kezia Dugdale, for their efforts and the work that they did in shaping in the report in the committee. As a member of the first local authority that introduced a living wage in Scotland, I am glad to see a committee report and this subsequent parliamentary debate on the issue. As a long-term supporter of the living wage campaign, I am happy with many of the report’s conclusions and the committee’s broad support for the living wage. I hope that the report and today’s debate will further strengthen the Scottish Government’s support for the move towards greater implementation of the pay rate. The campaigners for the living wage campaign have long championed the benefits for employees in the private and public sectors as well as the potential boost for the economy and combating poverty. In Glasgow, the local authority now has more than 160 recognised living-wage employers from the public and private sectors. By committing to the living wage, each of those employers has their details included on the dedicated website, www.glasgowlivingwage.co.uk. Those companies have a combined workforce of more than 50,000 people and, from 1 April this year, those people should earn a minimum of £7.20 per hour. Some might argue that encouraging the public sector to increase wages, even for the lowest-paid people, is not wise in the current climate, but as the committee report recognises, strong preventative spend benefits are associated with implementation of the living wage. That should be noted, particularly when preventative spending is being encouraged. There are knock-on effects for issues such as fuel poverty. I often hear about the need for greater support for low earners who are suffering from fuel poverty; the living wage can help to tackle that problem. The link between gender and low pay can also be targeted through the living wage, which in turn can help to tackle child poverty. Figures from the Poverty Alliance Scotland suggest that two thirds of all low-paid workers are women, which increases the number of children who are living in poverty. The living wage has had support from Save the Children as being one tool that can lift families and children out of poverty. As I said earlier, more than 160 public and private employers in Glasgow are now committed to the living wage for their employees, but none of those employers is in the hospitality industry. The Commonwealth games is coming to the city in 2014 which, it is hoped, will mean a boost for the hospitality economy in the city. We need therefore to ensure that that potential boost is reinvested in the people of Glasgow, especially those who are on low incomes. Also on the hospitality trade, during the games, we must make sure that sessional workers who are employed to accommodate an increase in demand are fairly rewarded. A living wage for what are likely to be young people, for the most part, is essential so that they can build up finances to support themselves when the work is removed. It is fair to say that, if low-paid workers are paid a bit more, local economies will benefit from the increase in people’s incomes. Spending more in their local communities, and supporting jobs and growth, will clearly bring great benefits and the living wage can help to achieve that. Although there are success stories across the country for the living wage, there are difficulties with rolling it out further, particularly through procurement processes. In Glasgow, the council asks bidders whether they pay their staff the living wage, but that cannot be a weighted factor at the moment. Although local authorities such as Glasgow City Council have worked well and hard to increase the number of businesses in their areas that take seriously the responsibility to pay their employees at the living-wage rate, we need more support for greater implementation from the Government. The public sector, along with the trade unions and anti-poverty groups, has been at the forefront of the campaign for a living wage, and the Scottish Government must also become an advocate for changes to legislation, to support the growth of implementation. As the committee report notes, the experience of the London living wage has been that major international companies have signed up, and that needs to happen here, too. I hope that any future procurement legislation proposals that are brought to the chamber will take note of those issues. It would be the perfect chance to put the living wage at the heart of employment in Scotland. I look forward to the day when everyone in Scotland can engage with a living wage.

I am glad to speak—quickly—in the debate, on an issue that, as we have heard, is of great interest to the people of Glasgow. I thank my colleague Councillor Alistair Watson and Glasgow’s Evening Times for their save our stations campaign, which highlighted the level of real concern that constituents in Glasgow feel. Last month, when Patricia Ferguson secured a members’ business debate on rail services, I read Transport Scotland’s rail 2014 public consultation document. I noticed that the ministerial foreword says that the Government believes that it “can achieve a distinctly Scottish railway, attuned to the needs of our country”. Figures show that the number of people who use the Glasgow stations that are at risk—those listed in the fact sheet—has risen in recent years. That surely illustrates the need to keep stations open in that part of the country. The fact that the number of people who use those stations has increased at a time when train fares have continued to rise suggests how important the stations are. The Government says that it wants to, and believes that it can, achieve a railway that is “attuned to the needs” of the country, and it is clear that the country’s biggest city needs those stations.

I am sorry, but I have only four minutes—unless the Presiding Officer is willing to give extra time.

In relation to the stations in Glasgow that could be affected by closure, we need to consider the impact on our communities. For example, the elderly rely on having train stations close by. Do we ask them to stretch their pensions even more to take a taxi to a station that is further away? Like most other cities, Glasgow has a lower number of car owners than is the average outside the cities, so more people rely on public transport. Those people also stand to lose out if the changes come to fruition. We have heard that the Government has no plans to close stations, but the people of Glasgow, whom I represent, remain deeply concerned that a number of railway stations are under threat. Is it any wonder that they are sceptical, given the Government’s well-known cancellation of the Glasgow airport rail link project and its extension of the ScotRail franchise without consultation? The rail 2014 consultation document could have provided us with an opportunity to debate positive changes to the way in which our rail services are delivered. As 2012 is the international year of co-operatives, we could have discussed the potential for a co-operative model for our railways. I am keen to hear from the minister in his closing speech what work the Government will do to pursue that as a viable alternative. Surely money that is generated on our public transport should be ploughed back into improving standards and services and not into shareholders’ pockets. Instead of discussing such alternatives, we are being asked by concerned constituents to ensure that the Government takes heed and bins the station closure plans. I hope that the Government will listen to those calls, drop the proposals and support the motion, as those constituents are also its constituents and the Government will ultimately be answerable to them. I also hope that the Government will not blame any closures in the near future on the results of the consultation.

I thank Mr Dornan for his somewhat humorous speech. I am tempted to say that I would like to take it and do the reverse of it. I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. Like Sarah Boyack, I aim to highlight the disproportionate budget cuts that local authorities are receiving from the Scottish Government relative to the cuts that the Scottish Government is receiving from Westminster. Even with yesterday’s welcome sweetener, the Scottish Government appears to be hammering local authorities and their approach to delivering public services. Glasgow’s cash-terms cuts mean that our city will be millions of pounds worse off.

I will continue. Glasgow City Council will be the third worst-off local authority under the spending plans, although Glasgow is the largest city in Scotland, and it will be the only local authority to have its budget cut five years in a row. Glasgow is again being penalised by the Edinburgh-based SNP Government.

No. Protecting Glaswegians’ priorities will be a greater task this year as we struggle to balance the decreasing budget with the needs, issues and aspirations of our communities, which we strive to serve. The impact will hit the most vulnerable in our communities—those who depend on local government services—and will ultimately result in more people losing their jobs. That is the reality of bleeding Scotland’s local authorities. The SNP will continue to assert its council tax freeze for hard-pressed households, but the reality for Glasgow City Council is that the past two years have evidenced an increase in the number of council tax exemptions, which has led to a shortfall in council tax income that is received against the council’s budget. The casualty list from the bleeding of the local authorities includes the wider community and voluntary organisations that have benefited from local grant awards to enhance service delivery for and by communities. The rising pressure on local partnerships to increase service delivery with a decreasing budget is only too apparent in the single outcome agreement commitments. A cut of £16 million over the next three years will increase the difficulty of delivering high-quality locally accessible public services. All that comes after the SNP tried to cut Glasgow’s housing budget by £122 million. The council forced the SNP to delay that cut for one year, but we know that it will be back with it.

It still equates to a 30 per cent cut. The finance secretary, John Swinney, and the SNP Government may still struggle to justify the housing budget cut to the people of Glasgow. I know that the Labour administration in the city chambers, which is led by Gordon Matheson, will continue to struggle on the city’s behalf against the bias that I have described, in order to protect our communities from the worst of the cuts. Putting the city first is Glasgow’s priority. This SNP Government is very good at passing the buck and blaming others for the impact of its cuts.

I am just coming to my last sentence. Here again we have the same old rhetoric: the SNP administers on local authorities real pain, and brandishes Westminster with all the blame.

I, too, thank Liz Smith for bringing this important debate to the chamber. I am glad that the motion “congratulates Scotland’s colleges in terms of the outstanding contribution that they have made to improving educational opportunities for a wide range of learners”. The importance of access to further education should not be underestimated at any time, least of all in times such as these, with youth unemployment at an all-time high. This week, like every other week for the past few months, I have received e-mails from constituents who support NUS Scotland’s our future, our fight campaign. Over that time, I have met and actively listened to lecturers, principals and students, who share strong fears about the future of further education colleges in Scotland. Members often hear that our young people are Scotland’s future. Nobody knows that more than the lecturers and support staff who work with young people every day in our colleges. However, those lecturers are also Scotland’s future. Many staff who have contacted me have many working years ahead of them. However, that is in theory, because between now and 2015, those staff stand to lose out in the same way as current and prospective students from a 20 per cent real-terms cut. With class contact time already down and class sizes being increased, the long-term consequences of those cuts are deeply worrying. The people whom I have met also have concerns about the knock-on effects that could damage their educational opportunities—for example, students are concerned about being unable to afford travel to different campuses if the course that they want to do is withdrawn from the local college. The uncertainty about what courses colleges will be able to run is an issue that I regularly hear about from people who contact me. The cuts have already created that issue. In addition, students and staff need to know about the future of their local community campuses. That is a particular worry for young parents I have met, many of whom wish to take FE courses. They have told me that they are worried that they will have an ultimatum to stretch their own finances further for the additional travel and childcare if community campus closures force them to go further afield. I have touched on the concerns of students and lecturers. It would be folly of me not also to point out the importance of maintaining the employment of all the other staff who also contribute to the running of Scotland’s colleges—the maintenance and support staff are also concerned about the possibility that, as the lowest-paid workers, they will be the first to be squeezed as the budget cuts hit. We must remember the people who play a vital role in making sure that the campuses are clean and maintained for use and who also help students—particularly new students—to find their way around a new environment and engage with the college in general. Those members of our community worry that the future of their jobs is at risk. They, like the students and teaching staff, deserve to have full support in helping to build Scotland’s future, and do not deserve to lose their jobs as a result of what are clearly cuts to the FE sector.

I begin by stating my appreciation for the role that kinship carers play in providing a safe and loving home for some of Scotland’s most vulnerable children. It is important to recognise that kinship carers take on responsibility for children who are the victims of circumstance and not of their own actions. We must also make it clear that kinship carers are often unaware that they will have to take on that responsibility. From my time as a care manager within social work, I am well aware of the situations in which kinship carers find themselves. There is often a knock at the door in the evening and a plea from social work explaining that if the prospective carers do not take responsibility for the child or children, they will end up in care. Although I have great admiration for the hard work of the care sector, there is no doubt that being doorstepped and being given an ultimatum such as, “Take the kids or they go into care” fosters fear in the would-be carer. The usual result is of course that gran, granddad, aunt, uncle, friend or relative takes the children in.

No—I have only four minutes. If the carer has no supply of practical resources such as clothes or bedding, an already difficult situation becomes all the more challenging. We must increase support for the kinship carers who are quite literally left holding the babies, and we must finance and resource that accordingly. Adoption parents and foster carers have a process by which they make themselves available to bring children into their lives and their homes. Foster carers build up the experience of having to take in children at short notice, as well as building up the much-needed clothes and other essentials. The difference is that they can afford to build such stocks over time because foster carers generally receive more financial support than do kinship carers. We must also acknowledge the impact on the health of kinship carers from the stress of having extra mouths to feed and bodies to clothe. One of the most important points to be made is that problems can arise because many carers might be unaware of the process that they need to go through to claim what they are currently entitled to. So, in providing the much-needed increased funds to local authorities, we must also encourage the development of a system that is relatively easily to access. Too many kinship carers already suffer additional stresses; lengthy bureaucracy is the last thing they need, want or deserve. I am truly humbled by the people I have met who have become kinship carers—the friends, neighbours and family members of vulnerable children. They make an invaluable difference to the lives of children across Scotland. It is only fair that the support that they deserve be made available to them. I hope that members will agree and support the motion in the name of Jackie Bailie.

As most members will know, I am an elected member of Glasgow City Council. I wanted to declare that interest before I contribute to today’s debate. I welcome this debate on the forthcoming local government elections in May. It is a welcome change to have a discussion about a vote of which we know the date, and in which we know what will be put to the electorate. As we know, reflection, analysis and action on the elections process were needed after the circumstances of the 2007 vote. Many voters were left feeling disenfranchised by the whole situation and I am sure that no one in the Parliament wants that to happen again. The work that was done to produce the Gould report was therefore needed and welcome. In preparing for the debate, I was struck by the fact that the Gould report said that having too little time to incorporate changes adequately into the electoral process was consistently reported to the research team as having been problematic. That made me think that this debate is also rather late in the day, as we have less than four months until polling day.

No. Lest we forget, the underlying principles for us as elected members are representation, democracy and dialogue. We should all strive to increase participatory democracy at all levels, to enhance citizenship and to redress the democratic deficit. The decentralisation of decision-making processes to our communities is imperative. That enables us as politicians to best represent the needs, issues and aspirations of communities, as we are elected to do. Recent history suggests that we might have a disproportionately low turnout on polling day and that a vast number of people will not use their vote. That issue is particularly important and needs to be addressed, especially as this will be the first stand-alone local government election in almost a decade and will involve a huge number of new voters. As seasoned canvassers, campaigners, party animals and—what else have we had this morning?

Anoraks—that was it. I am sure that we have heard many of the reasons that people give for not voting, but we must all try to work together to increase awareness and interest, in the hope of increasing turnout in May.

After all, one of the Gould report’s recommendations was that we put voters first and ahead of any party self-interest.

No—I will not. We must strive to increase participatory democracy at all levels and enhance citizenship and we must work to redress the democratic deficit, especially locally, where the situation is being noticed more and more with the onset of cuts to public services because of the Scottish Government’s council tax freeze.

As a member of Glasgow City Council, I know that its budget will have the biggest cut in Scotland between now and 2015. Given funding cuts of £25 million, for example, it is no wonder that local democracy struggles to engage with voters.

That applies especially because such cuts will be felt most by—

Such cuts will be felt most by people in the most vulnerable circumstances and could result in the withdrawal of vital council services in communities across Glasgow and Scotland. I want the people of Glasgow to turn out and vote in the forthcoming local elections. First and foremost, I want them to feel that they are voting in an open and fair process. As a woman from a working-class background with a particular interest in the women’s movement, I am often reminded of the struggle of people like me to get the chance to vote. It is because of the class and gender struggle for suffrage that I feel not just pride in having a vote but the responsibility to use it.

It is of course vital that the people of Scotland have the opportunity to participate in the forthcoming local government elections through a system that they can trust and engage with. That is why the Electoral Commission’s role is extremely important. The Electoral Commission’s independence ensures that the public feel greater confidence in the procedures with which they engage. As we know, responsibility for local government elections is devolved to the Scottish Parliament, so the same legal requirements for the commission to have a direct role in the conduct of elections that are reserved to Westminster do not apply. However, we should not underestimate the value that the commission still offers. It plays an extremely important role in giving advice to local government candidates, their agents, officials and activists, for instance. In fact, the dedicated pages on the commission’s website are of real value to those groups, and they should be widely promoted. Perhaps most significantly, the Electoral Commission has a proven record of working to maximise voter registration, participation and awareness. As I said earlier, that is a must if we are to encourage more people to engage in the local elections. I am glad to support the amendment in the name of Sarah Boyack, as it acknowledges that excellent work. I hope that members across the chamber will also recognise that work and support the amendment.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to increase broadband take-up in Glasgow. (S4O-00592)

As Glasgow’s broadband infrastructure could support higher uptake than the present level, and given that there is an issue about computer access, does the cabinet secretary agree that greater public access to computers should be supported in schools, libraries and further education college community campuses?

I begin by offering all members my best wishes for the new year. I hope that it brings everyone good health and happiness. I am glad to speak in the debate, which is in some senses about ensuring the health and happiness of looked-after children through their educational attainment. As a former care manager for children and families in Glasgow’s social work department, as a member of the Scottish Parliament, as a corporate parent with Glasgow City Council—as a Glasgow councillor—and of course as a mother of three children, providing education services that deliver for and meet the needs of all Scotland’s children is extremely important for me. However, the reality is that in our country there are unacceptable levels of youth unemployment, which is expected to be higher among looked-after young people. When we look at the statistics for Scotland’s looked-after children, we see lower levels of educational attainment than the national average. The number of school exclusions, which can lead to a greater chance of unemployment for those young people once they leave school, is higher. Moreover, as the Education and Culture Committee’s inquiry has heard, there are serious concerns about the identification in schools of the individual support needs of looked-after children. The Scottish Government must take note of that concern, especially given that the number of support staff in schools decreased after the first three years that it was in power. However, we should address more than just the issue of support staff; lessons must be learned from Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Education reports, which have suggested that schools are not even always aware of the relevant and specifically designed training materials for looked-after children. There are positive examples of engagement that can be drawn upon. Other members have spoken about their areas and I will speak about mine. In Glasgow, specific initiatives such as CLASS—the community learning and support service—are making a difference to the lives of vulnerable young people. CLASS provides care and education for young people aged between 14 and 16 who have additional support needs arising from family circumstances and social and emotional factors. The educational attainment of all Scotland’s young people is a vital issue, especially at a time when young people are often the recipients of a bad press—they are painted with the same brush when it comes to their contribution to civic life. It can be even worse for looked-after young people, who can feel demoralised by the stigma that is the result of a situation that is not of their making. With public services under threat and the United Kingdom Government Welfare Reform Bill hitting vulnerable groups harder than others, we need to fight to protect the services that work for those groups. We also need to respond to their evolving needs, issues and aspirations in a more creative manner that nurtures the potential of all our young people and enables them to achieve their aspirations. Education and the principle of learning should be liberating rather than domesticating young people for their place in society. If, as we so often hear, youth are our future, we must prioritise investment in their education for life and for employment. If we are to improve the educational attainment of our looked-after children, reduce the number of exclusions that they experience and increase their attendance levels, we must involve them far more in the detail of the education and learning curriculum and ensure that the ethos of the learning environment nurtures a can-do attitude and a realisation of leadership qualities. As I mentioned earlier, additional services are available to looked-after young people in Glasgow. We have heard from other members about projects in their areas. A quality learning experience should not be dependent on a postcode lottery but should be funded, resourced and accessible to all young people. Young people throughout Scotland—particularly those from disadvantaged groups—should all have the opportunity to seek further and higher education. I am aware of how important further education—in particular, community campuses—has been to disadvantaged young people in my community and throughout the country. The Scottish Government must protect local access to further education to provide much-needed facilities for disadvantaged young people to use. Scotland’s looked-after young people often face difficult circumstances and challenges through no fault of their own. For their sake, I hope that we can work together with them, as well as for them, to provide a better education and life now and in the future.

I feel a “Ho, ho, ho” coming on—all in good spirit, I am sure. Having been a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee since the start of the session, I am particularly interested in speaking in this debate. I am sure that all my committee colleagues will agree that we have gained a vast amount from the informative submissions that we received on the Scottish Government’s draft budget—and at this point I must thank our previous convener, Gavin Brown.

Absolutely. The foreword to the draft budget sets out the Scottish Government’s commitment to use its powers, its energy and its abilities to maximise the value and impact of public spending for Scotland. However, a number of expert witnesses have told the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that the Scottish Government is not using its full powers to maximise the value of public spending in Scotland, particularly with regard to fuel poverty. Fuel poverty in Scotland has grown at an alarming rate. Energy Action Scotland’s alarming estimate that 40 per cent of Scottish households will be fuel poor by the end of this year has already been mentioned in debates in the chamber and I am sure that all members agree that the figure is shameful and fairly disturbing. The households experiencing fuel poverty include some of society’s most vulnerable individuals: the elderly, people with long-term illnesses and disabilities and those with young children. Under the proposals in the Welfare Reform Bill, households in fuel poverty stand to lose many of their current entitlements; indeed, the bill’s policy memorandum states that local authorities and third sector organisations will be required to fill those gaps, placing in jeopardy their ability to offset the effects of fuel poverty at a local level.

Yes, since it is Christmas.

May I answer that question throughout the rest of my speech, please?

If I have not answered it, I am sure that Jamie Hepburn will tell me at the end. The target date for the elimination of fuel poverty is 2016. It is therefore imperative that any draft budget that is brought forward contains clear and detailed clarifications of how Scotland will achieve that goal. I admit that the fuel poverty budget for 2012-13 shows a rise in funds to about £65 million, but we must put that in the context of the swingeing cut of about £14.3 million made to the fuel poverty budget for 2011-12. That is despite estimates that, by the end of this year, fuel poverty will have increased to approximately 40 per cent. In addition, the amount that has been earmarked for each year between now and 2015 fails to reach the figure of more than £70 million that was provided for 2010-11. That is just the tip of the iceberg. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee also heard that funding committed to the universal home insulation scheme and the energy assistance package this year is £54.5 million, which represents a reduction of almost a third from the 2010-11 budget. In its submission to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, Energy Action Scotland said that £200 million a year is needed to fight fuel poverty and that the Scottish Government should provide at least £100 million a year. The Existing Homes Alliance echoed that call. When it reviewed the draft budget, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee heard that not all of the £18.7 million for domestic energy efficiency is going to fight fuel poverty. The Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment stated: “I would not like to put a precise figure on it.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 2 November 2011; c 510.] We must ask where the money will go and how much of it will go to combating fuel poverty. In the light of those details, I believe that the cabinet secretary owes the chamber some answers. There is no room for fuel poverty in the 21st century. It is time that the Scottish Government backed up its fine words with actions.

19. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to encourage growth in credit union membership. (S4O-00507)

The United Kingdom Government’s Welfare Reform Bill will put significant financial strain on a number of our most vulnerable groups. Does the cabinet secretary agree that credit unions will have a crucial role to play in providing ethical financial support and advice, particularly to those who are most affected by the bill? Furthermore, does he agree with me—

Does the cabinet secretary agree that credit unions require additional assistance from the Scottish Government?

Today’s debate is welcome, as it is about ending an issue that is not welcome in our society. Unfortunately, it is well known that violence against women remains all too common across the country. Be it domestic violence, rape, prostitution or any other form of violence, there are various situations in which women across Scotland suffer abuse and live in fear. Today’s debate is not about seeing one particular area of violence against women as more important than any other; it is about recognising that all forms of violence against women are wrong and that stopping the cycle is a must. The term “hardest hit” is often used in this chamber, and I thought very carefully about using it today, given the topic. However, I feel that this debate gives us a chance to show that women are often hit hardest in society. People will argue that in the 21st century it is wrong that violence against women still occurs far too regularly, and they are right to do so. However, we must also recognise that in the 21st century there is still sizeable inequality between pay for men and women—hitting women harder. In the 21st century, there is still a glass ceiling in the workplace for many women—hitting women harder. It is therefore imperative that in dealing with the most horrific examples of injustice for women, such as violence, we continue to educate people about and legislate against every other injustice that women may face today. Scottish Women’s Aid has stated that violence against women is not solely a women’s issue, as it diminishes each and every one of us and Scotland as a nation. I totally agree with that statement, but it is similar to statements about another problem in Scotland that is currently receiving far more attention than violence against women. Members will be aware of the statistics that suggest that a particular form of domestic abuse tends to increase during the weekends of old firm matches. We need to act on the wider repercussions associated with those fixtures. If, as appears to be the case, there is an increase in domestic violence in the wake of those games, we need a concerted effort to ensure that we are prepared to deal with the outcomes. In order to target resources where they are most needed, the Scottish Government should commission independent research into the correlation between the 48-hour periods surrounding old firm matches and levels of domestic abuse. I am happy to see that Nil by Mouth is calling both for that measure as part of its 13-point plan and for the expertise of Scottish Women’s Aid and others to facilitate that mapping exercise, which could play a vital part in future preventative measures to tackle one area of violence against women. It is essential that we substantially increase funding to deliver those plans as well as others, such as a groundbreaking advertising campaign aimed at changing wider public attitudes. I therefore call on all members to support the amendment in the name of Jackie Baillie in relation to focusing on prevention as a means to an end.

Given that I have only a short time—although I am grateful for it—I will amalgamate what I was going to say into a couple of points for the cabinet secretary to address in his closing speech. I rise to support Richard Baker’s amendment and to say that I am aghast and sad that although we are nearing the end of this debate, the main and worst affected group has not been given proper mention. The fact is well researched that women, who make up two thirds of public sector employees, will bear the brunt of the tax credit changes. In 2014-15, the changes will potentially lead to women losing around £687 million, compared to men losing £388 million. That is the biggest attack on women in a generation. One of our Labour colleagues, Yvette Cooper, is quoted as saying: “the chancellor’s plans hit women more than twice as hard as men”. I would like the cabinet secretary to address those points in his closing speech and outline some of the measures that he hopes to put in place to redress the situation.

I thank Sandra White for bringing this members’ business debate to the chamber. I share Bill Kidd’s passion about some of the projects that he has mentioned—I live in the same area and I am heavily involved in some of the youth projects there. There are great projects, such as the intergenerational project. Last week, I had the pleasure of going to a presentation for a 90-year-old woman who had worked for 70 years as a volunteer with young people. It is a fabulous project. Having worked with youth justice in Drumchapel, I have to say that, although the truth about youth project is great and meets the needs of some people, it does not meet the needs of others. While I was working in the social work department, there were great strains, with some local projects not being able to meet the needs of the young people who were coming through the youth justice project—in particular the ones who were vulnerable and perhaps also going through the children’s hearings system at the same time. There was a gap, but I hope that the minister may well choose to fill that gap by the end of his speech.

The last time I spoke about youth unemployment in the chamber, I asked the Scottish Government to give a guarantee on the maximum waiting time for entry into the opportunity for all programme and reiterated the calls that have been made by some of our most respected children’s and young people’s groups. Today, I again join Barnardo’s Scotland in asking for a commitment from the Government to ensure that all Scotland’s young people are placed in the opportunities for all programme as quickly as possible. That said, it is clear that the ever-increasing number of unemployed young people need more than just a guaranteed maximum waiting time to access the opportunities for all programme. We have already spent time in the chamber in this parliamentary session condemning the crisis of youth unemployment in Scotland. Unfortunately, every time we debate the issue, the number of young people who are affected appears to have risen. Action needs to be taken in a number of areas for our young people, and particularly our most vulnerable young people: in employment and apprenticeship opportunities; in education and training; and in tackling the inequalities that are prevalent in our society. Inequalities that relate to housing problems, drug and alcohol dependencies, and domestic violence can present barriers to young people gaining employment. All of those issues have been well debated in their own right, so I want to focus first on another issue that is particularly important to the people whom I represent. Broadband take-up in Scotland has not increased since 2009. It is disturbing for the people whom I represent in Glasgow that the figures suggest that we have a lower uptake than the national average. There are particular concerns for people from low-income households, only around 26 per cent of which have broadband access. The low level of broadband access means that young people are in danger of missing out on various opportunities. They have no chance of looking through different job-search sites and making online applications—that assumes that there are jobs to apply for. Broadband access also gives our young people the chance to search for education places and training. Quite simply, if a person does not have internet access, it is not a case of need not apply but a case of not able to apply. In this day and age, when almost our entire society is linked through the internet, it is vital that anyone who is looking to enter the job market is at least able to utilise the vast amount of help and advice that is available online.

No. Writing a CV or application letter is difficult for anyone but, the first time round, the task seems almost impossible. However, with the aid of the internet, young people can get answers to their questions, get tips, watch online tutorials and find out the best way of putting together a CV and an application letter. All Scotland’s young people should have employment, training and education opportunities but, if we are to help those most in need, we must address the various problems with our infrastructure. Our young people, particularly those from our most disadvantaged communities, must have the resources to apply and prepare for those opportunities. However, those are the very communities that will suffer from the Government’s slashing of further education college budgets. The consequences of forcing FE colleges to merge will be felt most by those who most need the help, and potential closures of community campuses in disadvantaged areas could make it not just impractical but almost impossible for young people to access the courses that they need in order to enter the labour market. That will become a particular problem if the rate of bursary support is not maintained at least at this year’s level and I am pleased that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has provided verification in that respect. The bursary is vital for young people in disadvantaged communities hoping to go into further education and, if that support is reduced or disappears, the youth unemployment figures will undoubtedly increase and there will be an unquestionable knock-on effect on poorer families. Instead of going into education, young people often feel that they must find any sort of work to support their families. Bursaries tackle such problems and help to support college students through their education. I am glad that we are taking time to discuss this extremely important issue but we must also take action. I call on all members to support Scottish Labour’s motion.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive how it is strengthening the social economy to enhance sustainable growth. (S4O-00339)

Many of the social enterprises that have contacted me have raised concerns that the Government cuts to the third sector are increasing the demand on the social economy for its services. How will the minister address those concerns in order to support further this vital area of the economy?

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what the implications are for local access under the regionalisation approach proposed for the further education sector. (S4O-00311)

Many of the people I represent have lost out through community campus closures that have already taken place. How will the minister address concerns about a potential increase in travel, added childcare time and its cost and the accessibility needs of the most disadvantaged people affected by rationalisation?

I add my support for Monday’s launch of national adoption week, which I am sure every member will support. I also acknowledge the foster carers, kinship carers, adopting parents and all those who strive to provide a caring and supportive life for Scotland’s looked-after children. All members will agree that, whether or not this debate is taking place during national adoption week, it is extremely important that we secure a safe and loving home for all children as soon as possible. Members often hear the phrase “Scotland’s future” used in debates, sometimes on education and sometimes on modern apprenticeships. Today’s debate is equally about supporting Scotland’s future. We must ensure that the most vulnerable children in our society have the same opportunities as any other child has to be part of that future. As we have heard today, there is a lot of evidence that delays and hold-ups in finding suitable homes for children can impact seriously on long-term outcomes. Given that around 16,000 children and young people are in local authority care but only 218 were adopted last year, calls for greater outcomes for adoption services have been made by a number of organisations as well as by different levels of government. For example, Barnardo’s is concerned that there are not enough foster carers with specialist training and skills to support children with complex and demanding needs. We need the Government and local authorities to consider ways of recruiting and supporting many more such foster carers throughout Scotland. There is concern about the demand that is being placed on residential units throughout Scotland, as more and more looked-after children with complex needs come into units and more wait for places. Without more specialised foster carers, long-term placements for those children may be only an aspiration, not a reality. There is a danger that the children may spend their childhood in numerous placements and residential units. The Government and local authorities must therefore focus on ensuring that all looked-after children, especially those with the most challenges and needs, are given the opportunity to have a safe, loving and nurturing home. Despite the low number of adoptions last year, we can at least see some positives. In Glasgow, we have seen progress, with the figures doubling last year after a concerted effort to encourage more people to come forward. Glasgow City Council is already taking further proactive approaches in tackling some of the factual inaccuracies that are associated with adoption, particularly in relation to eligibility criteria. However, we cannot look solely at adoption as a way to improve the lives of our looked-after children. A number of children may not be being cared for although they still live at home, and those children may enter the care system. The damage to life chances that can come from living in an abusive household are well documented. In an attempt to support those children, Glasgow City Council and the local health board are working in partnership with the NSPCC to test the New Orleans intervention model. That early intervention method has had a positive effect on similarly vulnerable children in the United States. I am glad that the Scottish Government’s chief scientist office has provided funding for research into the pilot. Although it is aimed at building relationships between children and foster carers, it has potential benefits for other children in their interpersonal development, providing a steady platform on which to build the rest of their lives. The model also has potential benefits for children who are regarded as looked after but who remain at home. No one would argue against all of Scotland’s young people being given the best support possible from all public services. Under the Scottish Government’s proposed bill on young people’s rights, ministers would have to have regard to children’s and young people’s rights and views in making policy. That is a step in the right direction. However, although I support the intention behind the proposals, children and young people may still lose out if the proposals are not extended to cover local authority and health board decision making. We must take a comprehensive approach to recognising children’s rights in the policy process. By doing so, we can begin to tackle many of the barriers that looked-after children face and help them and all other children to become part of Scotland’s future.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am sure that all members will agree that a comprehensive action plan for dealing with severe winter weather is essential. We have, after all, seen the results of bad responses in bad weather. I therefore welcome the winter weather review group’s report, which was published last week. I am glad that the Government acknowledges in it that lessons had to be learned from last year. Last year, we witnessed the appalling situations that we have heard about from the previous speakers. I agree with the review group’s assertion that disruption from severe winter weather is inevitable, but a standstill should not be. We cannot run the risk of families, commuters or ill people being stuck on a motorway worrying whether they have enough petrol to keep their car running in order to keep warm. The report states that, in terms of snowfall and cold weather, the winter of 2009-10 was the most severe for 31 years and that December 2010 was the coldest December for over 100 years. All of that is fair to say, but it fails to recognise that our technology, machinery and forecasting ability were the best that they had ever been. In other words, the problem of the coldest December in a century was made worse by the mismanagement of resources. The gridlock on our motorways not only left people of all ages isolated but left businesses out in the cold. According to the Freight Transport Association, a haulage vehicle’s running costs can reach £400 a day, so the standstill was an unwelcome blow for smaller businesses, in particular. The weather struck the business community when our economy was taking a hit as a result of the Government in Westminster cutting too fast and too far, and the problem was compounded by the Government in Holyrood acting too slowly and too late. We witnessed unnecessary problems not just on our roads but in our public transport services. Delays and cancellations as a result of bad weather are not unheard of—I am sure that every member can testify to that—but the cancellation of train services mid-journey, without replacement services or stand-by buses being organised, was not good enough. If the Scottish Government can organise a knighthood for a bus tycoon, why could it not organise a bus to pick up stranded train passengers? The winter weather review group said that part of the rail network suffered from flooding “following short duration/high intensity rainfall which overwhelmed local drainage system.” I am sure that many members who use the service from Glasgow Queen Street can bear witness to the flooding at Queen Street tunnel. Long-term weather predictions suggest that our winter climate will become milder and wetter, so I fear that there will be more service disruption in the area unless the problem is tackled. Despite the commitment in the report to further study of water volumes and drainage systems, there is no mention of potential flooding on the rail network in the briefing that ScotRail kindly provided for the debate, which I am sure members have read. It is important to learn lessons from what happened to Scotland’s roads and public transport services last year. We must also address another alarming issue. The number of Scottish households that are categorised as fuel poor has reached 900,000. The Scottish Government must act to protect vulnerable members of our community as winter approaches. If conditions are similar to those last year, the number of fuel-poor households will rise, as will, I fear, the number of deaths that are attributable to people having to choose between being cold and going hungry.

No, but I will take the intervention at the end of my speech, if I have time. I am glad that Labour’s Jenny Marra has secured a crucial debate this evening on the alarming number of people in fuel poverty, and I hope that members will engage in the debate. We must ensure that tackling fuel poverty is part of the winter resilience plans. The review group acknowledged that individuals and community groups played a vital role in supporting people during last year’s severe weather. I know of many organisations and individuals in Glasgow who went above and beyond to help their communities. Such organisations need support if they are to reach members of their community who do not have iPhones on which to install apps and do not use Twitter or Facebook to find out about train cancellations. For such people, there is no better resource than the voluntary groups, community associations, community councils and public services that they deal with and trust. The Scottish Government must strive to better equip such service providers and groups to engage with vulnerable people on fuel poverty. For example, Energy Action Scotland has, in the past, provided fuel poverty training for a variety of people who already engage with fuel poor households, ranging from midwives to Macmillan Cancer Support staff and Money Advice Scotland. If the Scottish Government is serious about making sure that this winter does not result in deaths, it must act now and provide funding for fuel poverty training for the service providers and groups that work closely with the most vulnerable people in our communities.

That is me finished. Sorry.

I thank Jenny Marra for securing the debate. As we are all aware, the number of fuel-poor households has reached a staggering figure and, alarmingly, that figure continues to rise. That cannot be allowed to continue. People will be asked to prioritise food or fuel as we approach the winter months, especially if the weather is as severe as it was last year. It should be acknowledged that an affordable, warm, dry home is a basic human right. Some extremely valuable services offer lifelines to the most vulnerable members of our communities. For instance, Glasgow Housing Association has specially trained staff members to provide tenants with energy-saving advice. The free home visit by GHA’s energy specialists allows tenants to be guided through the process of ensuring that their homes and lives are more energy efficient. It is not only through Glasgow Housing Association that support has been made available. The Glasgow home energy advice team—G.HEAT—offers Glasgow residents free and impartial advice on all aspects of energy use. Both those services can help residents to save money on their fuel bills, as well as making their homes easier to heat. The key service that they—particularly G.HEAT—offer is that they can provide not only much-needed advice but invaluable advocacy. I am sure that all members have personal experience of the hassle that can arise from trying to change suppliers. However, for many of our most vulnerable groups, the task of trying to rearrange utility provisions is far more daunting than we can ever imagine. That is where G.HEAT can make a difference to people’s lives. Its specially trained advisers can act on residents’ behalf when dealing with the energy companies and arranging better deals. If the Scottish Government is serious about helping some of the 900,000 fuel-poor households, it needs to recognise and build on the positive work and engagement of the likes of GHA and G.HEAT. In order to do that, we need to expand that model throughout the public and third sectors. Energy Action Scotland has provided fuel poverty training to a number of groups and individuals, who are already engaging with potentially fuel-poor households. By utilising the networks of midwives, community psychiatric nurses and other health professionals who are already in contact with vulnerable people and have their trust, we can truly start to lift people out of fuel poverty. The Scottish Government must provide additional funds to facilitate that type of training. I am aware that I said that earlier. I am sure that the minister will mull over Rhoda Grant’s reply on that point. When dealing with fuel poverty, we must not shy away from the fact that we are dealing with fuel poverty as a whole. In doing that, we must think about the institutions that continue to make a positive impact on the lives of impoverished people in our communities. We need to strengthen the support that is available to the credit union movement, which continues to provide low-cost, affordable loans and financial services to its members. We need to ensure that the ethical model of credit unions is promoted, reflecting credit unions’ positive record of supporting fuel-poor members by engaging in advice and guidance services.

The credit union movement has utilised its low-cost loans to members to buy out prepaid meters, which have been shown often to hit poorer people harder.

Also, by providing credit union—

What additional funding will the Government provide for training on fuel poverty for individuals and organisations that work closely with the general public and, specifically, with vulnerable groups?

I thank Paul Martin for securing the debate. I also welcome the members of the East Glasgow Parkinson’s support group to Parliament this evening along with some of my colleagues from Glasgow City Council. There is widespread concern at Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board’s decision to close Lightburn hospital, as was demonstrated by the recent march and rally calling for the plans to be dropped. As some members will be aware, the east end of Glasgow has some of the poorest health statistics in Scotland and the United Kingdom. We know that the rates of heart disease, stroke and cancer are extremely high and that life expectancy figures, particularly for men, are at an alarming level. We must therefore question why our local communities, which rely on the vital services that are provided at Lightburn hospital, will be cut off from them and will be given little or no alternative. The lack of alternative for local people is why the Scottish Government must step up and keep Lightburn hospital open. Rates of car ownership are significantly lower in the east end than they are in Glasgow as a whole, which means that more people in the area rely on public transport. However, the bus services coming out of the east end are limited, particularly in Cranhill, from where there is no public transport after 7 o’clock. As local people will rely on public transport to get to alternative hospitals, they are left with no alternative. Even if someone meets the criteria and qualifies for patient transport, it finishes at half past 6 in the evening, leaving local people with no alternative. With no direct trains or buses to Stobhill hospital from the wider east end area, local people will again be left with no alternative. Even if someone is able to get to a different hospital, there is no guarantee that it will be able to take the patients that Lightburn would have been able to take. Stobhill hospital has been selected as one of the hospitals that could shoulder the burden of the closure of the Lightburn hospital, but the acute bed space that would be required at Stobhill is not even in place, so where is the viable alternative for patients? I heard today that a person from the east end of Glasgow has had to be hospitalised in Edinburgh, which means that he does not have the vital support of his family, who cannot afford to go there on a daily basis. What all this means for local people is that there is no alternative to Lightburn hospital if it closes. That is why they have campaigned so strongly to keep it open and why the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy must listen to those calls and act to halt the hospital’s closure.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. I am sure that all members agree that the Parliament faces many important decisions in the current economic climate. This debate on the Scottish Government’s economic strategy allows us to address some of those decisions, and it is important to use the opportunity to highlight any strengths or offer alternatives to any weaknesses in the strategy. I am glad that the strategy details plans to provide our young people with employment opportunities. With the youth unemployment that exists, it has never been more important to deliver for our young people. That unemployment, coupled with the proposed changes in the Welfare Reform Bill, which will mean that 16 to 20-year-olds will lose their exemption from national insurance contributions when they receive the employment support allowance, could leave our young people in an extremely vulnerable position. I am glad that the economic strategy plans for the delivery of 25,000 modern apprenticeships per year. The delivery of modern apprenticeships can provide excellent opportunities for our young people to enter the workplace with the skills that they need to succeed and to contribute to our communities. Ensuring that such a scheme truly delivers for those people is a must. Members may be aware that, to enhance the modern apprenticeship schemes, Barnardo’s Scotland is calling for a guaranteed maximum waiting time for young people to go on to an opportunity for all programme. I am happy to support that call. I want to raise the issue because it is not enough for young people to be told that the opportunities for all programme will be available to them—they must be able to plan and work towards entering it. A guaranteed maximum waiting time will indicate clearly that the programmes are being run with the purpose of ensuring that provision is available within a reasonable timescale. It is vital that our young people feel that they will enter a programme that will deliver for them. That is why the economic strategy needs to ensure that the programmes are clearly monitored and there are full reports back to the Parliament. I am aware that, in response to previous freedom of information requests, Skills Development Scotland has indicated that it does not track the long-term progress of apprentices following the completion of their modern apprenticeships. That simply cannot be allowed to continue. I want the young people of Scotland to feel that they have a real and meaningful opportunity to gain the skills, experience and qualifications to go on and succeed in their endeavours. Without the monitoring of those programmes and the subsequent information being provided, how can we show that they provide the opportunities that they are designed to provide? Without that reassurance, I worry that our young people will not be able to engage fully with the programmes and receive the opportunities that they deserve. It is also important that we are able to monitor the quality of the apprenticeships that are being delivered to our young people, to ensure that they are fit for purpose. It is surely not unreasonable to ask that our young people know that they are being given the best possible training. We cannot allow our young people simply to be shipped from one training scheme to another without any positive outcome for them. Before I move on, it would be folly not to highlight the growing concern about the increase in women’s unemployment. I opened my speech by saying that I would highlight strengths and weaknesses, but one of the weaknesses is more of an omission. I am disappointed that there is severe lack of recognition of the contribution that the social economy makes to our economy. The global financial crisis has shown that the consequences of irresponsible financial practices are hitting our most vulnerable hardest. That is why I hoped that the economic strategy would indicate more support for social enterprises, credit unions and other forms of financial co-operatives. Credit unions in particular should be supported in their role of providing responsible lending within their communities, as well as encouraging people to save. The credit union movement plays a crucial role in local communities in tackling poverty and providing financial inclusion to the wider community. The social economy also needs to see a real effort from the Scottish Government to increase business strength through enabling competitiveness in procurement and tendering opportunities. There is evident year on year growth within the social economy in Scotland, and that needs to be harnessed to maximise its role in our economy. In Glasgow, the city that I represent, there are a number of examples of businesses in the social economy that make a genuine contribution to people’s lives and to the economy. However, more support is needed to grow the sector across Scotland and within our economy. I urge the Government to take note of that omission and to acknowledge and further strengthen that infrastructure.

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to address the level of insulin pump therapy available in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area. (S4O-00120)

According to the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, there are more than 700 people with type 1 diabetes in the NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde area who could and should benefit from an insulin pump; yet, the number of people accessing pump therapy is a mere 67—only 1.1 per cent of the type 1 population. NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde has, to date, unfortunately failed to deliver an insulin pump service that meets the needs of the type 1 population in the area.

On behalf of those constituents, I urge the Scottish Government to make a real effort to enforce its commitment. Access to pump therapy should be boosted significantly across NHS board areas over the lifetime of the action plan.

Thank you, Presiding Officer, for the privilege of presenting my maiden speech today. Prior to addressing the chosen subject of education and lifelong learning, I will thank a few others. I thank my colleagues, both members and staff in the Parliament, for their warm reception and support to me, as a newly elected MSP. I congratulate all my colleagues in the chamber who have delivered their maiden speeches; they have set the bar really high—thanks for that, there is no pressure now. To those who are still to undertake theirs, I say good luck. I thank the constituents of Glasgow for their faith in electing me as a representative, and I pledge to them my proactive participation at the highest level in representing their needs, issues and aspirations. I thank my predecessor members of the Scottish Parliament who built the foundation of representation in Glasgow: Frank McAveety, Charlie Gordon, Pauline McNeill and Bill Butler. I pay tribute to their sterling efforts as Glasgow constituency candidates of great integrity and conviction. Last but by no means least, I thank my family and friends for their uncompromising love, support and faith—and a special thank you to the chair of my local Labour Party branch and the Glasgow city party, Mr Tommy O’Connor, my great friend and mentor. As a newly elected MSP I intend to work with a passion to pursue social justice. Glasgow is and has a history of being a city enriched by the politics and principles of fairness, with a strong sense of community. As a Glaswegian I am proud to serve the city, as I share that passion for socially enriched, sustainable and inclusive communities. Prior to my becoming an elected member, my academic training and practice were as a community education worker, in the realms of social work. The job encompasses the privileges of responding to the diverse and complex needs of communities in the most disadvantaged areas in the west of Scotland and responding to the challenges of active citizenship, to enable and empower young people to articulate their voices. It is about the development of structures that enable communities to be central in local decision-making processes. It is about building community capacity, enhancing the local social economy and enabling communities to be self-determining and self-directing, with services provided for and by communities—something that is imperative given the prevalence of ideas about the big society and the transfer of public services. It is about the design, development and delivery of community-based adult learning, including literacy and numeracy programmes. The aforementioned work afforded me the honour of engaging with numerous dedicated volunteers and community groups, while turning social policy into action. Education and lifelong learning is therefore a passion of mine. I am passionate about the right of every individual to pursue their potential through education. I urge members to subscribe to an idea of education that is not merely for school-age pupils but is for a nation of ageless learners, and to acknowledge the trajectory from early years and through mainstream education to adult and continuing education, as rites of passage. Education and lifelong learning are key to economic development, employment imperatives, entrepreneurialism, active citizenship and personal, social and community development. The current disharmony and revolt on education in rural Scotland and in our Scottish universities is manifesting itself in students’ and parents’ engagement in demonstrations and rallies, which have been indicative of people’s passion for local, accessible schooling, the retention of university departments, the maintenance of student numbers and the preservation of jobs. It is therefore incumbent on the Scottish Government to re-engage with COSLA on a Scotland-wide strategy for schools and to ensure that departments of, for example, sociology, art, music, geography and community education are retained. Community education departments train students who will be deployed in the most disadvantaged communities in Scotland, nurturing lifelong learning and building capacity so that services can be run for and by communities. Widening access should be a key priority during this parliamentary session. We need an education system that is open to everyone on the basis of ability, not income or background. I urge the Scottish Government to commit to a nation of ageless learners, whether people’s reasons for learning are to do with academic excellence, employment, personal or social development or entrepreneurialism—or indeed are intrinsic—because strong, empowered citizens make for effective Governments.