8. To ask the Scottish Government when it will provide an update on the purchase of Glasgow Prestwick airport. (S4O-02874)

Since the purchase of the airport, no business case or further information about the Government’s plans for the airport have been forthcoming. What steps will the minister take that can be reported to the Parliament today to return Prestwick to profitability without skewing the market away from Glasgow airport? Does she agree that the future of Glasgow airport and Glasgow Prestwick airport is of the utmost importance to the Scottish economy?

I welcome today’s debate on the international day of zero tolerance for female genital mutilation—an important day that will be recognised tomorrow. I am grateful to Jenny Marra for securing the debate, in which we can take a stand against this brutal and wholly unacceptable tradition. Last Thursday, the Equal Opportunities Committee held a very informative evidence session with organisations and experts on FGM in Scotland, including the Dignity Alert and Research Forum, Roshni, the Scottish Refugee Council, the Kenyan Women in Scotland Association, NSPCC Scotland, the Women’s Support Project, Rape Crisis Glasgow and Dr Oonagh O’Brien of Queen Margaret University. We considered a future inquiry into FGM in Scotland and, during the short time that I have today, I will convey to the chamber some of the ideas that we heard. First, with international zero tolerance day in mind, I stress that FGM is a global issue. Tackling FGM is as much about an international response, led by the UN and the WHO, as it is about the response of the Scottish Government and local communities here in Scotland. The WHO estimates that between 120 million and 140 million girls and women are living with the consequences of FGM worldwide, and the European Parliament estimates that 500,000 girls and women have experienced FGM in Europe. As my colleague Jenny Marra said, in Scotland 3,000 women and girls are estimated to be at risk. FGM is most prevalent in parts of Africa, Asia and the middle east, but movement across borders means that women and girls who were born here but who have family connections with those regions can be just as much at risk as women or girls who were born there. When the committee took evidence, I was surprised at the effectiveness of an initiative that has been introduced down in England, where women and young girls in such circumstances are given a passport that confirms that FGM has not been carried out on them. When women go abroad with their daughters to visit their families, they can show the passports to their families and say, “Look. This is a legal document. If we go back and my daughter has had this done, I will go to jail and I will not have money to send to you.” That seems to be a very effective deterrent that the minister can perhaps investigate. It is simple and seems to be really effective. If we as policy makers are to banish FGM to history, we need to understand why practising communities sustain traditions that are so unacceptable, and how we discuss FGM is important. The practice must not be tolerated but, equally, we must be conscious of how we engage with minority communities on the sensitive issues of culture, race and the bodies of young girls. Standing up to FGM in Scotland is about much more than what is on the statute book. We have to build capacity to engage with practising communities and to raise awareness among those who work with, but who may not belong to, practising communities. We need to support engagement with practising communities to educate people about the realities of FGM and the law in Scotland, and to tackle the pressures that many women in practising communities face. In addition, we must ensure that we work with organisations such as DARF to develop and share good practice so that we train healthcare and social work professionals to identify those who are at risk and to support those who have been mutilated. However, let us be clear: as one of our witnesses said to the committee, if persuasion and prevention do not work, the only option left is prosecution. FGM is unacceptable in a fair and equal Scotland. It is an abuse of human rights, and it must not be tolerated.

I support same-sex marriage as a matter of principle. Not long after I was elected to the Parliament, I was proud to pledge my support to the equal marriage campaign. However, legislators have a responsibility to make sure that all sides of the debate are heard, that everyone’s rights are respected and that all bills undergo proper scrutiny. That is exactly what I have tried to do as the convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee and I can say the same for my committee colleagues. Whatever our initial thoughts about the principles behind the bill, we worked together to take evidence, over several months, to produce a balanced and comprehensive report on the bill and to debate many of the amendments that have returned to the chamber in some form today. At the end of that process, having listened carefully to the different arguments that have been made, I am more convinced than ever that it is right to pass the bill and to legislate for equal marriage. Much has been made in the debate of the state of public opinion. We have been told that the majority of respondents to the Government’s consultation opposed changing the law and that to do so would therefore be against the wishes of the Scottish people. It has even been suggested that the bill should be put to a referendum. However, I do not believe that the rights of any minority should be dependent on the will of a majority at a particular point in time. Nor do I believe that members should take a view on the bill on the basis of the way that they think the wind is blowing. We must do what we believe is right. Nonetheless, let us take a closer look at public opinion. Professor John Curtice reminded the committee that pro forma letters and emails that are part of an organised campaign might tell us more about the structure than the state of public opinion. Opinion polls actually show that 60 to 65 per cent of the public support same-sex marriage and that is consistent with the findings of the independent Scottish social attitudes survey. Many of the amendments that have been presented today, like those that were presented to the committee, relate to concerns about how the bill might affect people who have a traditional view of marriage. In my view, such amendments are unnecessary, because sufficient safeguards to protect the rights of those people either already exist or are provided for in the bill. The only religious or belief bodies that will solemnise a same-sex marriage and the only religious celebrants who will participate are those who want to. That is what the opt-in approach that has been taken in the bill is all about—legislating for equal marriage but securing the right of religious and belief bodies to decide whether they want to be part of it. No prospective foster carer or adoptive parent should be refused solely on the basis of their views about same-sex marriage. The best interests of the child should come first, as they do under the law at present. Furthermore, the right to express a traditional view of marriage as being between one man and one woman is already protected by our freedom of expression; it does not require a specific mention in the bill. There is one amendment that was withdrawn during stage 2 on which I want to press the cabinet secretary today. One of the Equal Opportunities Committee’s concerns at stage 1 was that the bill does not allow couples in a civil partnership that is registered in another country to change their civil partnership to a marriage in Scotland. That could leave those couples trapped outside the law as the only same-sex couples unable to marry in Scotland. I was, therefore, happy that at stage 2 the Scottish Government recognised the problem and committed to dealing with it. However, the point is to be addressed by order and not through primary legislation, to allow the Government time to consult on the detail of it. It is important to me and to several other committee members that the Government act on that point and that any change is done right. At stage 2, my committee colleague John Finnie asked the cabinet secretary: “can you give an undertaking that the general policy approach on the matter will be, as far as possible, to enable all same-sex couples with foreign civil partnerships to marry in Scotland?” The cabinet secretary’s response was: “Absolutely, and that is why I need time to get the approach right.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 19 December 2013; c 1707.] In the light of that guarantee given at stage 2, I ask the cabinet secretary to provide more information about the process of introducing an order to deal with that specific point and the timescale that we could expect the order to be delivered in. This Parliament has come a long way since the debate on section 28 and it has come even further since the introduction of civil partnerships. The case for equal marriage has been made. The safeguards are there. The bill does not curtail religious freedom, it enhances it. The bill does not deal in half measures for same-sex couples, but gives them the same rights that every other couple has. Let us vote today for a bill that we have already waited too long for. Let us vote today for a fairer Scotland.

As convener of the cross-party group on towns and town centres, I am very keen for the future of our town centres to be pushed up the political agenda. Accordingly, I welcome this afternoon’s debate. I also join colleagues in welcoming the broad aims of the town centre action plan as well as the work of Malcolm Fraser and his external advisory group, which has informed so much of the Government’s thinking on town centres. Many of the ideas coming out of the review and the action plan, including mixed-use town centres, digital towns, community enterprise and regeneration are sound and have received broad support. However, what I have learned from the Fraser review and my experience in the cross-party group is that there is no one-size-fits-all solution to town centre regeneration. For example, solutions for my home town of East Kilbride, which is a new town with a big retail-focused town centre, will be different from Hamilton down the road, which has adopted the business improvement district model. That point is crucial because as Business Improvement Districts Scotland, the Association of Town and City Management, Development Trusts Scotland and Scotland’s Towns Partnership will tell us, towns have to develop their own unique selling point to be resilient in an economy that is increasingly dominated by online sales and out-of-town retail. I want to make three specific points about the action plan’s content. First, on business rates, Labour remains, despite claims to the contrary, committed to the uniform business rate and the small business bonus, although we believe that the latter could have been targeted in a smarter, sharper way. As Labour has argued for greater flexibility in rates to incentivise growth at the local level, I am very interested in the incentivisation proposals in the action plan. However, certain issues are coming up time and again, with town centre traders telling us not only that the valuations are out of kilter with the property market but that the process of appealing an assessor’s decision is time-consuming, convoluted and sometimes just impenetrable for local firms. Secondly, on town centre living, I want to bring Paisley to the chamber’s attention. In its study visit last year, the cross-party group visited a number of Renfrewshire towns and found Paisley to be interesting because the BID’s vision for the town is about not just retail but people living and socialising in the town centre. Although the town centre housing fund is welcome, it must be part of a wider regeneration strategy for our towns and we should also be clear that it is a drop in the ocean with regard to meeting housing needs in Scotland. Finally, on the town centre first principle, which Gavin Brown referred to in his speech, I think that it is good but it would be helpful if Police Scotland, the Scottish Court Service and the Post Office Ltd also recognised it. However, I notice from parliamentary answers that no definition of what “town centre first” actually means has been agreed by the Scottish Government and COSLA. The truest criticism of an otherwise welcome action plan is that many of the points that it contains will take time to implement and that is time that some businesses simply do not have. For example, although I expect the community empowerment bill to become very important to anyone who is interested in regenerating our town centres, the consultation period has not even closed yet. I wish the minister well in putting this plan into practice, but will conclude simply by impressing upon him the urgency of putting in place measures to make Scotland’s towns more resilient and attractive, even in these testing times.

I, too, apologise for my absence for part of the debate. Following the publication of the Healthcare Improvement Scotland review of the safety and quality of care in NHS Lanarkshire, I took the view that three things should happen. First, there should be on-going independent scrutiny to ensure that the review panel’s findings are implemented. I understand that that is happening. Secondly, there should be a full parliamentary debate on the health service, such as the one that Labour has secured today, to give members the opportunity to discuss the review and wider issues that the NHS in Scotland faces. Thirdly, the Scottish Government should support Labour’s call for a full inquiry into the pressures on our NHS because, as the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh has said, the problems in Lanarkshire will be familiar to clinicians across the country. I want to focus on how the experience of patients and staff in NHS Lanarkshire strengthens the case for the full and comprehensive review that Labour calls for in our motion. Mortality rates in Lanarkshire’s three acute hospitals triggered the HIS inquiry, which reported at the end of last year. We now know that mortality rates at Hairmyres and Wishaw are closer to the national average than first anticipated, but Monklands remains an outlier. However, the panel’s findings across the three sites should give us all cause for serious concern. I am not aware of anyone in the Scottish Government who disputes or contests a single finding of the HIS report. To the best of my knowledge, the Scottish Government has accepted the report in full and therefore accepts that there was “a significant disconnect” between what the leadership team thought was happening in Lanarkshire and what was actually happening on the ground; that there was a “lack of sustained delivery” in accident and emergency; that there was an underreporting of risk; that there were examples of clinicians not escalating concerns about the safe provision of care, because they did not think that anything would change as a result; that there was a “persistence of practices which represent an unacceptable risk to safe patient care”, such as a lack of consultant cover; that the pressures of providing services across three acute sites were a recurring theme, not least in respect of staffing and workforce recruitment; and that staff at all levels in NHS Lanarkshire believed that unscheduled care was in “a state of perpetual crisis”. If the Government accepts those findings, surely people in Lanarkshire are entitled to ask how on earth our Government allowed such a grave situation to develop when the problems faced by the health board are so well documented. It should not have taken a spike in mortality rates in Monklands hospital, or in any hospital, for ministers to see that the pressures that were being felt across the NHS were being felt so acutely in Lanarkshire. Time and again, I have raised with the Government, the health board and Lanarkshire communities my concerns about pressure points in the health service, especially on A and E. The HIS review panel stated: “there is a growing evidence base linking poor flow and sub-optimal scheduling in healthcare to an increase in mortality, adverse events, readmissions and poor financial performance ... there is evidence that congestion in the accident and emergency department and the hospital increases the risk of death for patients admitted to hospital.” Last month, the Sunday Mail reported on the longest waiting times in A and E—over 12 hours—doubling across Scotland and trebling in Lanarkshire. NHS Lanarkshire and a Scottish Government support team are looking at how to improve patient flow and, hopefully, address those long-standing issues. However, we have been here before, and the report makes clear that “previous interventions to support NHS Lanarkshire to achieve the 4-hour standard have not resulted in sustained delivery.” The Government cannot just pass the buck to the board on A and E, because there are questions to be asked about its own effectiveness. Whenever I raise my concerns about the A and E crisis in Lanarkshire, the health secretary refers to decisions that were taken seven years ago to retain Monklands A and E. However, HIS has shown that the Government has retained three A and E units in Lanarkshire without addressing any of the underlying issues that compelled the health board to consider moving to two A and E units in the first place.

I will just continue, if the cabinet secretary does not mind. Minor injuries units have been scrapped in Cumbernauld and new investment in Hairmyres and Wishaw was cancelled. On medical staffing, the review team stated that “the inescapable conclusion is that the actions taken to date are inadequate.” NHS Lanarkshire faces a series of grave, recurring challenges, but we cannot look at that health board in isolation. We have to look at decision making and leadership in the health service at all levels, including the decisions that come from the top. That is why I believe that a root-and-branch review is needed now and that is why I support the Labour motion.

The review report contains withering criticism of NHS Lanarkshire. It says that there is a “disconnect between what they thought was happening and what was actually happening.” It highlights practices that amount to an “under-reporting of risk” and unacceptable risk to patient safety. On medical staffing, it says that “the inescapable conclusion is that the actions taken to date are inadequate.” How could all that happen on this Government’s watch, especially given the repeated complaints and media attention that NHS Lanarkshire has attracted since 2007?

16. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the NHS Lanarkshire rapid review assessment by Healthcare Improvement Scotland. (S4O-02702)

Papers from NHS Lanarkshire confirm that an examination of unscheduled care and accident and emergency is a critical part of the HIS inquiry. Performance against A and E targets has deteriorated across Lanarkshire’s three acute sites while the inquiry has been going on, according to figures that were collected over the autumn. In light of the scale and urgency of the situation in Lanarkshire, will the Government press for the timely completion of the review and commit to providing a timely response?

The debate provides a timely opportunity to consider the women and work agenda. I say that not just because of the topicality of childcare in last week’s business, but because it has been well over a year since the women’s employment summit of September 2012, which was jointly organised by the Scottish Government and the STUC. In addition, the Scottish Government recently submitted its response to the Equal Opportunities Committee’s report on women and work. While acknowledging many of the welcome comments in that response, I want also to stress that there are areas in which more could be done with the powers that Parliament already has to address unemployment and underemployment among women, and the inequalities that exist in the labour market. On occupational segregation, the committee noted many examples of good initiatives that are being undertaken across sectors including education, industry and Government, and heard suggestions about further action that could be taken. In particular, the committee stressed the role that schools could play by bringing industry representatives into education and presenting a more accurate and holistic view of the job opportunities that are out there. Occupational segregation is manifest in training, too; the committee expressed concern about the gender imbalance in modern apprenticeships. I welcome the commitment that has been given to an awareness-raising campaign to challenge some of the stereotypes and assumptions behind that imbalance. However, it is also important to point out that some committee members felt that the Government could have produced a stronger response. The committee made some strong recommendations on flexible working. Although ultimately the legislation around flexible working is reserved, the Scottish Government is accountable for its own employment practices, and the wider public sector in Scotland should be accountable for its own practices, as well. The public sector should aim to be a good employer by leading by example and by promoting flexibility for families, and public sector jobs should be subject to a presumption in favour of their being advertised as being suitable for flexible working or for being filled on a part-time basis. Crucially, flexibility in employment should not be code for a reduction in employees’ rights; instead, it should mean a genuine accommodation between employers and their employees. The committee was also clear that childcare should be viewed as an investment in an infrastructure that supports our children’s futures, not just their parents’ practical needs. As we know, improving maternal employment can reduce child poverty. It is not the whole picture, but it is a big part of it, so we have to create options for parents to help them to achieve a work-life balance that supports employment, brings down poverty and improves their quality of life. In some ways, the prominence of childcare in last week’s debate was welcome, but we must not forget that Parliament has the power to act now, or that the extension of childcare that is provided for in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill was first promised well in advance of the 2007 election and is only now being considered in Parliament. Whatever the outcome of the constitutional debate, I hope that Scotland can move to a position in which transformational childcare becomes a reality, and that we can eradicate the inequalities in the labour market that hold too many women back. We do not need independence to start us on that journey—we just need to show the will and make it happen now.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what impact independence would have on the Department for International Development’s office in East Kilbride. (S4O-02645)

I thank the minister for that in-depth answer. We were told that the white paper would answer all our questions, but it does not make things any clearer for staff at DFID—a department that employs more than 500 people in East Kilbride. The Scottish Government cannot seem to decide whether to assure civil servants in East Kilbride that they will seamlessly transfer to the Scottish civil service or to tell them that they will stick with a UK civil service that will run its overseas aid programme out of a foreign country. Will the minister answer the questions that the white paper did not answer and confirm to DFID staff in East Kilbride what will happen to Abercrombie house in the event of independence? What will happen to the absolutely vital job base there, and why should those workers gamble their future on independence?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what the remit is of the minister for town centres. (S4O-02614)

I welcome Derek Mackay’s appointment as the minister for town centres. I appreciate his taking the time to speak to the cross-party group on towns and town centres, and I wish him well in his new role. The town centre action plan has been largely well received and I endorse many of the points in it. However, I ask the minister how he will respond to the criticism from the Federation of Small Businesses and others that issues such as business rates and the state of the property rental market have not been fully addressed. What is there that the business community can sink its teeth into that would address the cost of trading in town centres as opposed to out of town?

I welcome the opportunity to speak on behalf of the Equal Opportunities Committee, following our stage 1 report on the Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland) Bill. Before I introduce the report and speak about our conclusions, I extend my thanks to the clerks, all my committee colleagues and the members of the other committees that considered the bill—the Finance Committee and the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee. I also thank everyone who responded to our call for written evidence and all those who took part in oral evidence sessions in September and October. All of us on the committee recognise the validity, strength and sincerity of the views that we received on this clearly emotive issue. I am personally grateful for the sensitive and respectful way in which those views were presented by witnesses and then considered by committee members. I hope that the wider debate about same-sex marriage will proceed in the same dignified way. The committee noted the differing views that were expressed in evidence on the meaning and purpose of marriage. We considered evidence from faith groups and from LGBT people on the perceptions and understanding of marriage, and we heard from a number of witnesses about rights-based arguments and social attitudes.

No—I do not have time. I have a lot to get through on the report. Some witnesses emphasised the concept of complementarity between men and women. The Catholic parliamentary office, on behalf of the Bishops Conference of Scotland, wrote: “The complementarity of male and female, and their unique role in the transmission of life, underscores the reality of marriage as a natural social environment for the birth and growth of every person.” John Deighan, from the Catholic parliamentary office, described complementarity as the “inherent essence” of and “rational basis” for marriage. However, John Phillips, who was representing the Religious Society of Friends—the Quakers—gave a different perspective. He said: “For us, the crucial thing is the complementarity between two individuals who are making a committed relationship with each other”.—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 5 September 2013; c 1382.] Tim Hopkins, from the Equality Network, said: “Our view is that the bill is about love—and marriage is about love. I think if you ask most married couples what their marriage is about they will say that it is about love, a commitment to each other and, if they have children, their family. All those things apply to same-sex couples, as well.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 5 September 2013; c 1382.] Colin Macfarlane, from Stonewall Scotland, says that the bill is “about much more than the complementarity issue” and that it is “about how gay people are viewed in society and about being equal in the eyes of the law.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 5 September; c 1382.] Indeed, we gave a great deal of consideration to equal recognition, human rights and public attitudes. Dr Kelly Kollman highlighted to us the “transformative” power of rights-based arguments in the debate. I am aware that many of the responses to the Scottish Government’s consultation did not favour the bill. That point was made to the committee in written and oral evidence from John Deighan. However, Ross Wright from the Humanist Society Scotland commented that a consultation “not a referendum”. Professor John Curtice, from the University of Strathclyde, advised that we “should not look to consultations as a way of understanding the balance of public opinion”, but that we should instead look to “the structure of public opinion”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 19 September; c 1516.] and technical issues with bills and proposals. There was a huge amount of diversity as well as depth in the views that we received, so I hope that the whole range of opinions is adequately reflected in the report. The committee also noted varying views among stakeholders on the approach that the bill takes to protecting celebrants of faith, as well as the freedom of religious organisations to conduct legal marriages that are in keeping with their own doctrines. We heard differing views on the opt-in approach for religious and belief celebrants, on protections for service providers and on concerns about attrition. In our report, we asked the Scottish Government to consider that range of views during the amending stages of the bill. Under the Marriage (Scotland) Act 1977, there are two types of marriage ceremony: civil and religious. Since 2005, humanist celebrants have been authorised under a provision of the 1997 act that was designed for temporary authorisation of religious celebrants. The bill would retain two categories, but would redefine non-civil marriage ceremonies as “religious or belief” ceremonies, to capture a wider range of beliefs and to put religious and belief celebrants on the same legal footing. Ephraim Borowski of the Scottish Council of Jewish Communities considers that there is a distinction between religious and belief ceremonies, and so believes that belief ceremonies should form a third category. The committee notes the Scottish Government’s explanation for why the bill retains two ceremony categories, but we have sought the Scottish Government’s views on an amendment to the bill. The committee took a range of evidence on civil partnerships, including evidence on the difference between marriage and civil partnerships, the treatment in the bill of civil partnerships that have been registered abroad, and the future of civil partnerships in Scotland. We note that the Scottish Government plans to consider issues relating to reform of civil partnerships, including civil partnerships for opposite-sex couples, in its forthcoming review. Should same-sex marriage be introduced, there would be a procedure for converting civil partnerships into marriage. We believe that couples who enter into civil partnerships abroad, who would have to dissolve their partnerships before marrying here, should have similar rights to that procedure as couples whose civil partnerships have been conducted in Scotland. The committee noted the Scottish Government’s position that it has struck the right balance regarding gender-neutral ceremonies, and that allowing such ceremonies could cause problems for denominations that might not want to use gender-neutral marriage declarations. However, we believe that it should be possible to allow gender-neutral language, which is why we call on the Scottish Government to reconsider its position. We note evidence that calls for the requirement for spousal consent to be removed from the gender recognition process. The spouses of people who seek gender recognition may find themselves in circumstances that are difficult to face and we have not received specific evidence from their perspective. However, we believe that the non-transitioning spouse’s personal choice is sufficiently protected by the automatic grounds for divorce that are triggered by his or her partner seeking gender recognition. We also believe that the requirement of spousal consent for gender recognition, also known as the spousal veto, is unnecessary and should be removed. We have drawn two further conclusions regarding gender recognition issues that were raised in evidence. First, we have welcomed the Scottish Government’s willingness to consult on difficulties that are faced by long-term transitioned people, in particular around evidence requirements, with a view to amending the bill at stage 2. Secondly, we have noted representations that were made by the Scottish Transgender Alliance about lowering the age at which a person can secure gender recognition. We accept that it may not be possible to deal with those issues effectively in the bill, but I feel nonetheless that it is important to highlight them to Parliament. The committee took evidence on how the bill could impact on other areas of life, including the education system and chaplaincy in public services. We heard from John Brown, from the Scottish Catholic Education Service, and Michael Calwell, from the Family Education Trust, who spoke about the conflict between different views of marriage and the implications that they fear it could have for teaching in schools. However, when asked whether the bill would have an impact on how teachers teach in the classroom, Stephen McCrossan of the Educational Institute of Scotland said: “I do not think that the bill will have a significant impact on the way in which teachers teach in the classroom. We simply see the bill as another strand in equality and diversity, promoting equal opportunities and challenging discrimination.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 26 September 2013; c 1534.] On behalf of the committee, I draw Parliament’s attention to the views that were expressed regarding the relationship between the bill and public services, and to the recommendations that were made by the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee, which we note and support. To paraphrase Robert Louis Stevenson, we agree to differ, for agreeing to differ is a form of agreement, rather than a form of difference. The majority of the committee supports the general principles of the bill and recommends that Parliament approve the bill at stage 1. A minority of the committee does not support the bill. Those members either disagree in principle or are not convinced that adequate protections are in place. However, we are unanimous in supporting the right of individual members to decide on the bill as a matter of conscience. On a personal note, I know what my conscience tells me; I associate myself with the majority view that is expressed in the report. I back the general principles of the bill and I hope that there is a majority in favour of equal marriage when we vote at decision time tonight.

Will the member take an intervention?

The Royal College of Nursing tells us that person-centred care is one of its eight principles of nursing practice. It is a holistic approach based on mutual understanding and a relationship between patients and those who are responsible for their healthcare. I am sure that we can all endorse that approach today. However, the nursing profession also tells us that there are challenges to delivering that holistic approach to care. I want to highlight some of those issues, particularly in relation to my region. First, we must all recognise the context in which we are having this debate. From 2010-11, when the coalition Government came into office, until 2015-16, when hopefully it will leave, the Scottish budget will undergo a real-terms reduction of 11 per cent. That is a difficult context for public services, despite the level of protection that both the coalition and the Scottish Government appear to have afforded health spending. However, we should not allow a headline commitment offering notional protection for health spending to prevent us from following the money and examining in detail where it is being spent and how that affects healthcare. Our ambitions for the health service should be to shift the balance of care; to prevent ill health through early intervention; to promote healthier lifestyles; and to support self-management of the chronic illnesses and long-term conditions that are far too prevalent in Scotland due to our health inequalities and ageing population. Our ambition should be to diagnose and treat people in the community wherever possible in a primary care setting and to create pathways for patients that better support a preventative, as well as a person-centred, approach. By getting the balance of care right, we can reduce emergency admissions, prevent avoidable and expensive surgical interventions and create economies of scale in the NHS without undermining front-line services. By getting the balance of care right, we can ease the pressures on hospitals, especially in Lanarkshire where we have had long-standing issues with recruiting the right number of consultants for our three acute sites, and we can address those constantly recurring long waits in our A and E units and bed shortages in our hospitals. I am concerned that we are too often treating the case for prevention and shifting the balance of care as a novel idea or recent development. However, it has been almost 10 years since Malcolm Chisholm, as the then health minister, commissioned the Kerr report, and six years since “Better Health, Better Care.” In Lanarkshire, we have not seen the new primary care infrastructure that supports the vision and ambition that we had for a health service at that time or which we have for it now. NHS Lanarkshire’s response to the Kerr report, “A Picture of Health,” sets out plans for new minor injuries units and health centres across Lanarkshire that would support a holistic approach to health. We were told that the Scottish National Party supported those plans; we were told that all that it opposed in Lanarkshire was the decision to downgrade the Monklands A and E unit. Yet here we are, all these years later, and the three new health centres for Wishaw, Kilsyth and East Kilbride had their outline business cases approved only last month. Those units were supposed to be commenced or completed within five years of the publication of “A Picture for Health,” but that was published in December 2005.

We support the protection of front-line services; that is not happening under the SNP’s watch. Meanwhile, plans for minor injuries units in places such as Cumbernauld have been scrapped entirely. All those delays and abandoned projects and all that underinvestment in primary care happened under this Government—a Government that once promised to keep healthcare local. The result is not just seasonal pressure in hospitals and A and E, which the Labour amendment covers, but recurring, all-year-round challenges in Lanarkshire. Weekly figures compiled by NHS Lanarkshire show that it failed to meet the 95 per cent target for patients to be seen at A and E within four hours—never mind the 98 per cent target—in September and October of this year. However, it is not just patients’ experience of waiting in emergency rooms that worries me; it is what that reveals about our health service. Pressures that were anticipated years ago are manifest in our NHS across the country and in Lanarkshire in particular. I support calls from the Labour front bench for an inquiry into the pressure points in our NHS; I support investment in primary care of the kind that people in my region were promised years ago; and I support all the health workers at the coalface whose job it will be to maintain a person-centred service this winter and beyond. We can all endorse the person-centred approach, but I stress to the Parliament that we have to do much more to support the people who are responsible for delivering it.

I apologise because I have to leave early for another meeting at 1 o’clock. I congratulate Malcolm Chisholm on securing the debate and I commend all those who have been involved in the folic acid awareness campaign for their efforts. In particular, I pay tribute to the Scottish Spina Bifida Association. I hope that the launch of its campaign last Thursday, on world spina bifida day, was a success and that it will lead to change. The question for Parliament is this: what should that change look like and how can we help make it happen? We know that the better that women who are expecting babies manage their health, the better the outcomes are for everyone. We can prevent illness and long-term conditions, ensure a better pregnancy for mother and child and give every baby a better start in life. As the Scottish Spina Bifida Association makes clear, we can reduce the number of pregnancies that are affected by spina bifida and other neural tube defects. Let us be clear: support for children with spina bifida is better than ever. Our understanding of spina bifida and neural tube defects has improved, medical technology has advanced and paediatric neuroscience has evolved. However, there is a strong case for prevention; taking folic acid in the right quantities is the key to that. There is no shortage of information about the importance of folic acid and foods that are sources of vitamin B, but that information has to get to women who are expecting children and couples who are thinking about starting families. There are examples in the health service of best practice—of how that information can be presented in an accessible and instructive way. We need to learn from that best practice, and we can make a real difference by raising public awareness more generally and, I hope, getting the message to people pre-pregnancy. This is not about lecturing the public; it is simply about explaining how a regularly available substance in the right amounts benefits them and their children. My appeal today is that the Government and the chief medical officer work constructively with campaigners. We have seen progress on fortified foods; now, we have to see progress on public awareness. The will is there, the science is sound and the benefits cannot be ignored.

The committee’s inquiry into community transport has brought the Parliament’s attention to a well-used and much-needed set of largely voluntary services. I was glad to be part of that inquiry, and I hope that members on all sides of the chamber will give their fullest consideration to the recommendations that have been made. The evidence that we gathered should help us all to understand the difficulties that such projects can face, as well as the opportunities that they can create, especially for people who might be vulnerable or isolated. In the “CTA State of the Sector Report for Scotland 2012”, the Community Transport Association in Scotland found from the organisations that it surveyed that there were at least 25,000 volunteers in the sector, who supported 280,000 hours of voluntary service and 3.5 million journeys each year. It also found that demand for those services was likely to rise as a result of the ageing of the population and the tendency of the Scottish Ambulance Service to shed patient transport services and focus on emergency response. Let us be clear: community transport projects are vital, and they are of growing importance to Scotland because of our ageing demographics and the limitations of commercial bus services. Community transport is a lifeline for people whose transport options can be limited because of age, disability or—especially in rural areas and places that are not served by public transport—gaps in provision. During this year’s inquiry, I visited three community transport projects: one in Duns in the Scottish Borders through the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, and two in East Kilbride in my region. It was interesting to see how different projects that serve different people had grown and developed, and the variety of uses that had been found for community transport schemes. Over a period of 30 years, East Kilbride Community Transport has become a hugely successful service for local community groups. Its success reflects the passion, the dedication and the good business sense of Ina Cumming and her volunteers. East Kilbride and District Shopmobility is making the town centre accessible for all. It does more than just take people from place to place—it takes them from their front door to the shops and back again. In Duns, the Berwickshire wheels project keeps people connected in a rural area. It provides more than just the chance to go shopping or to visit a general practitioner; it is a social lifeline, too. One pensioner I spoke to in Duns told me that without Berwickshire wheels she would not be able to go to the theatre. The volunteers and the drivers do more than help her with the essentials—they help her to maintain her quality of life. At a time when the Scottish Government and others are emphasising the importance of prevention and early intervention, it is important to appreciate the difference that community transport can make. Helping the elderly, the vulnerable and the isolated to maintain an active lifestyle can prevent exclusion and promote wellness and independent living in later life. Those local examples show that community transport schemes are not just a valued presence in communities—they are in demand. In light of that rise in demand, I urge the Scottish Government to consider what further steps will have to be taken in future to support these services. If we follow the logic of preventative spending through to its conclusion, we can expect councils and the NHS to benefit from initiatives that help older people remain active and independent for longer. Comprehensive research into added value from community transport at this stage can help us to build a more cost-effective and better-resourced set of services for the future and, by working with Transport Scotland and the CTA, we can develop best practice and explore options for joint working and shared booking systems in order to bring down costs. All the committee and I are asking the Government to do is look at the options that are being presented to us, build up our understanding of the sector and consider how we might resource community transport in future. As demand for these projects is growing, we must have the evidence to allow us to make informed decisions about the future of community transport and the needs of these resilient, diverse and increasingly vital services.

In opening my remarks, I thought that it would be helpful to consider the words of the chair of the commission, Sir Ian Wood, who said: “We all understand the value of Scotland’s higher education system, but we now need to significantly enhance our vocational system—how we prepare our young people as they progress through to college, apprenticeships and employment.” I want to talk about how we can develop vocational education, close the gaps in employability provision and achieve parity with higher education. We have to challenge what the report describes as an “ingrained and frankly ill-informed culture that somehow vocational education is an inferior option”. In my opinion, we will achieve that by mainstreaming the very best practice and developing vocational education and training that is relevant both to the needs of the economy and to the needs of young people. First, I want to speak briefly about colleges and apprenticeships. The case for college regionalisation has been debated time and again in this chamber. We were told that it would lead to greater emphasis on job outcomes and regional labour markets. Let me be clear: I am not opposed to reform of the college sector in principle. I am, however, extremely concerned about the Government’s tendency to reduce college budgets at a time when the sector is changing so dramatically and when further education and training have never been more important. On apprenticeships, we have a good model in Scotland, but some of the feedback to the commission has indicated that more starts are required. I have said before and I will say again that we need to think carefully about how we increase the number of apprenticeships while preserving their quality. I therefore take some encouragement from the commission’s recommendations that modern apprenticeships should be geared towards supporting growth, and that we should be prepared to expand the number of MA starts accordingly, if we have buy-in from employers. In producing its interim report, the commission looked at examples of best practice from all across Scotland. I want to draw Parliament’s attention to three from my area from which we can learn. First, the commission observes that the in-school delivery of vocational education in North Lanarkshire, as part of a mainstream comprehensive education, has been recognised at both national and international level. In practice, that has involved partnership with the college sector and adaptations to school facilities in order to create an environment for young people that more resembles a workplace, but which remains based in the school. North Lanarkshire Council has provided a great example of how vocational education can be integrated into a normal school week—one from which other local authorities and schools can learn. Secondly, I want to highlight the work of Calderglen high school in East Kilbride, South Lanarkshire. The commission singled out Calderglen because of the inspection report that it received in December, in which staff, pupils, the school community and its partners were widely praised. The quality and range of partnerships that the school has forged in the community are said to “provide inspirational learning experiences for young people.” Its partnership with local employers—including Santander, the Optical Factory and the Scottish universities environmental research centre—was just one of the reasons why Calderglen high school became the first school in Scotland to have its curriculum evaluated as being excellent under the new curriculum for excellence standards. Thirdly, I want to draw Parliament’s attention to the work of the Prince’s Trust and its get into programme, which is cited as an example of an initiative to support young people who are at risk of disengaging from education. On Friday, I had the pleasure of presenting graduates of the get into logistics programme with their certificates at the Crutherland House hotel in East Kilbride. Seven young men and one young woman had just successfully gone through a short vocational course that was focused on developing their skills for logistics, with the involvement of a leading industry partner. All of them were offered warehouse jobs at the DHL-Sainsbury’s site in East Kilbride as a result. The programme is not just for logistics; there are more than 30 programmes across a range of sectors including retail, construction and hospitality. The get into programme is successful because it works with industry to produce sector-specific training, which gives young people work experience that is relevant and gives employers a better-skilled and more job-ready pool of potential applicants. Those examples demonstrate that real partnerships with employers, colleges and training providers can make vocational training more relevant and engaging. Ultimately, that can lead to improved outcomes for young people. Rolling out such best practice could not only close some of the gaps in provision that were identified by people who responded to the commission—particularly the mismatch of supply and demand, but the better outcomes could also help us to elevate the status of vocational education. Opportunities to work and train will always be more plentiful in a growing economy. Let us make the most of this opportunity to improve employability in Scotland, although we should remember that the real prize is not attainment for all, but an economy that works for all. That kind of economy must be based on full employment.

This Parliament and this country have a strong track record of promoting social inclusion, diversity and equality of opportunity. The European convention on human rights has been woven into the very fabric of devolution, having been given real legal force by the Scotland Act 1998 and the Human Rights Act 1998. We all aspire to become a better and more inclusive nation. From education to employment and every other aspect of life, we want people with learning disabilities to be just as included as everyone else in society. Last week’s debate on disabled people in politics reminded us that we still have some way to go if we are to meet those aspirations—so, too, does the on-going debate about welfare reform—but we are making progress and attitudes are changing. As the minister says in his foreword to the new strategy, people with learning disabilities themselves believe that they are more accepted and valued in their communities. With the strategy, we must build on the good work that has been done since devolution and bring the Parliament closer to meeting the aspirations that we share for people with learning disabilities. The first years of this Parliament saw “The same as you?” published. It was the first major policy review looking at learning disabilities, and it was a comprehensive, well-received document. Crucially, it approached the issues faced by people with learning disabilities as rights-based issues. That is acknowledged in both the current document and in the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability’s evaluation of the original strategy. Let me be clear: a rights-based approach was right then and it is right now, and a continuation of that approach is to be welcomed across the chamber. The other instance of welcome continuity is in the scope of the strategy, which covers the whole lifespan of the individual. For the 16,000 school-age children and young people with learning disabilities, the 26,000 adults with learning disabilities and the adults who may no longer self-define as disabled, the strategy must be there from birth to old age. For people of all ages and from every generation, the ambitions and the policies that are set out in the document must reflect and speak to the needs, hopes and rights of that diverse group. The fundamentals behind the strategy are sound. However, as Rachel Le Noan from Down’s Syndrome Scotland said in The Scotsman just the other week, the devil is in the detail. Specifically, it is in the implementation. How will the objectives that are set out in what is undoubtedly a substantive document be turned into a reality by the Scottish Government, public bodies, local authorities and the third sector? I recognise that the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, the NHS, the third sector and others have been partners in the development of the strategy. Their on-going partnership is absolutely critical as we take this agenda forward. However, we cannot ignore the context in which the strategy has been developed and in which it must now be implemented. Every one of those partners faces huge pressures on their budgets. There are wider changes, too, including the implementation of self-directed support, the integration of health and social care, and welfare reform. The background to the new strategy is therefore different from the background to the original one. Some of those changes will prove to be positive, while others—such as the welfare cuts—will not, but I hope that we all agree that, as we consider each of the 50-plus recommendations that have been made, we must be mindful of the pace of reform and ensure that we do not lose sight of the individual person or their rights. My final point is about the strategy’s welcome focus on the health of people with learning disabilities. People with learning disabilities are more than 20 times more likely to suffer from epilepsy and are more likely to experience illnesses that may require hospitalisation, following which they may experience delayed discharge. People with Down’s syndrome are particularly susceptible to hypothyroidism as they get older. The needs of people with learning disabilities can be complex and diverse, and those who may not be able to articulate their health complaints face added challenges. Therefore, I stress how important it is that the NHS understands learning disabilities. It is also important that independent advocacy is provided to help people with learning disabilities in their interaction with public services. Even in these tough times, we should aim to develop a more person-centred service for that section of the population through understanding and communication. The needs of people with learning disabilities are multifaceted and the inequalities that they face are rarely one dimensional. The strategy sets out a number of ways in which we can address those needs, build on the rights-based approach that has informed so much of the work in this area since devolution, and improve the quality of life of tens of thousands of people with learning disabilities all across Scotland.

As someone who has been a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee for less than a day, I was not—unfortunately—involved in the work that we are here to discuss, but I have before me two compelling and insightful reports that have left me eager to take the helm over the coming months. Those reports—“Gypsy/Travellers and Care” and “Where Gypsy/Travellers Live”, which were published in September last year and March this year—have raised clear concerns about whether the Scottish Government, local authorities and health providers are making due provision for one of Scotland’s traditional yet marginalised communities. Before I introduce the reports and speak about the recommendations that they make, I would like to extend my thanks to my new colleagues and former committee members who worked on the inquiries. My particular thanks go to Mary Fee, who oversaw both inquiries in her time as convener of the committee. The strong recommendations that are made in both reports are a clear sign of the committee’s engagement in the inquiries and the urgent need for action. Throughout its inquiries, the committee worked closely with Gypsy Travellers and the organisations that support them. Without the help of the Minority Ethnic Carers of People Project, which is an Edinburgh-based voluntary organisation that works with carers from black and ethnic minority communities, much of the committee’s engagement work would not have been possible. Through MECOPP, the committee was able to attend an awareness-raising session with Gypsy Travellers, to invite Gypsy Travellers into the Parliament on a number of occasions and to visit multiple sites across Scotland. When the committee explored issues in the north-east region, the Grampian Regional Equality Council provided invaluable support and helped to set up the first ever committee meeting to be held on a Gypsy Traveller site. The other voluntary organisations, health workers and liaison officers who contributed to the inquiries helped to give a clear insight into how joint working and the involvement of Gypsy Travellers in forward planning can lead to successful initiatives, which provided a basis for many of the committee’s recommendations. Of course, perhaps the greatest contribution to the two inquiries came from Gypsy Travelling people themselves. In reading the reports, I was pleased to see that a clear relationship between the committee and the Gypsy Travelling people whom it met has been formed. Given the emphasis that Gypsy Travellers and support workers place on the need for trust, that provides a clear starting point for implementing the recommendations that are made. One of the committee’s aims was to instigate action. Though numerous reports and recommendations have been made in the past, including a report by the 2001 Equal Opportunities Committee, the Gypsy Travelling community has experienced few positive changes. By talking to the committee, sharing their views and experiences in evidence and informally, coming to the Parliament and inviting committee members into their own homes, the Gypsy Travelling people whom the committee met helped to ensure that their voice was heard. I hope that that will set a precedent for the Scottish Government and its agencies in moving forward. The committee’s first report, “Gypsy/Travellers and Care”, explored the relationship between Gypsy Travellers and their access to health and care services. For Gypsy Travellers who travel, clear barriers can exist to accessing healthcare and education, and consistent support and funding. Those who live on permanent sites face challenges in securing appropriate adaptations, and cultural differences can mean that certain support options, such as respite care, are not delivered appropriately. In its recommendations, the committee focused on ensuring that all Gypsy Travellers had access to general healthcare and more specific support as needed. Emphasis was placed on ensuring that support and treatment are culturally appropriate and that care and funding for care are accessible and portable. The Scottish Government’s response left much in the hands of NHS Health Scotland, Education Scotland and local authorities. I hope to hear reassurances today that the buck does not stop there. The Government spoke of the revision of the general practitioner registration form, the adaptations working group and the relevance of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill and what was the Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill. I am sure that the committee would welcome an update on progress and on how provisions are being put into action. In its “Where Gypsy/Travellers Live” report, the committee shifted focus to the living conditions of Gypsy Travellers, and it visited seven sites over the course of the inquiry. The descriptions of site conditions in the report say it all. I quote: “We were deeply disturbed to see that families paying rent to their local council were expected to bathe young children in freezing cold amenity blocks with extortionate heating costs, and that elderly and disabled people might have to go outside to a toilet block in the middle of a cold, winter’s night. At one site, as well as a putrid overflowing septic tank and a fire hose that couldn’t reach all of the pitches, we heard that, with no bus stop or roadside pavement, the only way for non-driving families to visit local shops or take children to use a playground was to walk two miles to the nearest town along a muddy, unlit woodland path. Another site was barely lit at night, with appalling and tokenistic attempts to make adaptations for a profoundly disabled resident and sightings of prowlers in the woods which provided the only place for children to play. We even felt the fear ourselves of being able to safely access one site up a steep, potholed and gravelled path, only able to imagine the danger it could present in icy weather. Disturbingly this site was lacking in either a fixed phone line or stable mobile phone signal, leaving residents with medical conditions unable to easily seek emergency care.” That description is all the more shocking when we realise that the majority of the sites are council operated, with rental rates that are not dissimilar to those in standard social housing and tenants paying standard council tax rates, although many are paying purely for a pitch and an amenity unit. Recommendations in the report were aimed at creating equality in the standard of living for Gypsy Travellers through the establishment of minimum standards for site quality, established and consistent rights for site tenants through tenancy agreements and the adequate provision of temporary and permanent sites across the country. One thing that stands out in both reports is that those outside the Gypsy Travelling community understand little of Gypsy Travellers’ culture and the challenges that they face in maintaining their traditional lifestyle. The committee heard—shockingly—of Gypsy Travellers hiding their cultural heritage for fear of not receiving medical treatment, of being harassed or of being unable to find employment. Both reports highlight a lack of leadership at local, regional and national levels and urge the Scottish Government to set an example through clear guidelines and a zero-tolerance approach to discrimination, including the development of a national awareness-raising campaign. The Government’s response to “Where Gypsy/Travellers Live” set out details of a new cross-Government group that is designed to take forward the recommendations that were made in the two reports, with the aim of meeting the Government’s equality outcome that “Gypsies/Travellers experience less discrimination and more positive attitudes towards their culture and way of life by 2017”. Before the summer recess, the committee wrote to the Scottish Government about its response to express the concern that, although the Government seemed to agree with many of the findings of “Where Gypsy/Travellers Live”, there was a lack of action. That, sadly, reflects the committee’s concern that there is a lack of leadership at ministerial level. As the new convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I hope to hear more about that today. Going forward, we will look for as evidence a tangible action plan with clear goals and, more important, clear results. The committee made strong recommendations that were aimed at the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities in both reports. It raised the need for stronger leadership and consistency among local authorities. I am relieved that both COSLA and the Scottish Government have highlighted their intention to work together, but that intention must become action.

I do not have long to go, so I will continue. I am sorry. Since the publication of the reports, the committee has revisited progress and received updates from the support organisations involved. I am pleased that both MECOPP through the Scottish Government and Grampian Regional Equality Council through the national lottery have received further funding for their work and that national health service staff in Grampian are exploring a new joint approach to health engagement with Gypsy Travellers, but I am concerned to have heard of on-going issues in planning for new sites in the north-east. It is clear that political leadership is needed in tackling the negative attitudes that present a barrier to such development. The committee’s goals in bringing about real and desperately needed improvements to the lives of Gypsy Travellers are the stand-out feature of both reports. To that end, it has agreed to revisit the recommendations of the reports as time passes. We will expect regular updates from the Scottish Government, and I hope to see in the near future the development of a clear action plan emerging from the work of the cross-Government working group. It is crucial that that has a timeline, an assurance of consultation with Gypsy Travellers and other stakeholders, and measurable outcomes. We also hope to continue to monitor progress by keeping in touch with not only MECOPP and Grampian Regional Equality Council, but the Gypsy Travellers who contributed to both inquiries. As convener of the committee, I look forward to leading the committee’s on-going work and to hearing and seeing for myself the improvements that the Scottish Government and local authorities have in their power to bring about.

9. To ask the Scottish Government how it is promoting the employability fund to colleges and training providers. (S4O-02300)

The feedback that I have received from the sector suggests that there is some confusion about the role of the local employability partnerships and the new co-commissioning model. What is being done to satisfy the sector that colleges and training providers that are not members of the LEP are not being placed at a disadvantage when bidding for employability fund contracts because of the LEP’s dual role? Specifically, can the Scottish Government provide assurances that any labour market intelligence that is gathered by the LEP, which should be subject to the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002, will be published openly?

On Annabel Goldie’s question, the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee has heard that around 60 per cent of community transport initiatives were created during the lifetime of the rural community transport initiative and the urban demand-response transport funding streams. Since those funding streams were rolled into the concordat with local authorities, only nine new groups have emerged. Does the minister believe that the concordat and the single outcome agreements are properly supporting the development of community transport, given the excessive funding pressures on councils?

I welcome the opportunity to speak on Scotland’s railways and to underline the importance of our rail infrastructure to our economy, communities and potential as a nation. Scotland’s rail network is a tremendous asset that we can get much more out of than we do. The most underdeveloped part of the rail network, at least outside major cities, is our local train stations. I acknowledge the station improvements that have been achieved through the Scottish Government, Network Rail, SPT, First ScotRail and others. I can think of plenty of examples from my region of new car parking, new shelters, new signage and new toilet facilities, but we are still not realising the full potential of our train stations. I know that the minister is aware of the adopt-a-station programme and the difference that it has made to communities the length and breadth of Scotland. Through the scheme, volunteers or start-ups commit to sprucing up their local train station, often with flowers or artwork, but also with more ambitious landscaping and outdoor projects. There are more examples of communities successfully adopting stations than I could possibly name this afternoon, but I will draw particular attention to South Lanarkshire College, Crosshouse primary school in East Kilbride, Hamilton grammar and the staff and patients of NHS Lanarkshire’s Beckford lodge. Although the efforts of volunteers are welcome, our rail stations have a strategic importance that could be developed further. By growing the tourism trade, promoting active travel and regenerating town centres, good stations can support Government priorities at local and national levels. Every train station is a gateway to a community and a crucial transport link—not just part of the rail network but part of a bus route, local road or cycle trail. We should use our stations and rail services to sell Scotland and destinations in Scotland to businesses, tourists and our own people. I stress the benefits to the economy of sustained capital investment in infrastructure. In my area, improvements to the greater Glasgow suburban network would not only reduce journey times but create opportunities for people to work and to train, all of which helps to support growth. We have waited for some time for the electrification of the East Kilbride line. I am concerned that the knock-on effect of last year’s cuts to EGIP is that we will wait even longer. Scotland’s towns need reliable connections to Scotland’s cities, which is why I emphasise to members the importance of upgrading the rail network in such areas. I will focus on the needs and the experiences of passengers, which Passenger Focus, Transport Scotland and others set out in evidence to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee over several months. Passenger Focus’s report “Designing the Future—Rolling Stock Design” looked at the design of rail carriages and found that Scottish passengers’ requirements include safety, ease of access, comfort, luggage space and general cleanliness. Peak-time travellers emphasised their concerns about overcrowding and the capacity of our trains to cope during busy periods. Looking beyond rolling stock and design issues, I am sure that we all understand the importance of accessibility, multimodal transport links, reduced journey times and good wi-fi coverage. I hope that all those who bid for the ScotRail franchise will understand the breadth of the passenger’s experience. It is not just about getting on or off a train; it is about booking tickets, planning a journey and spending time in a station. Increasingly, it is about comparing trains with cars. I do not doubt that good work is happening on our railways—I have seen plenty of examples of it—but we have to raise our game to ensure that our entire rail network improves and will one day rank among the best in the world.

This week, the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee visited the Forth to hear first hand about the progress that is being made with the new crossing and learn more about the legacy of the existing one. I regret that I could not join my committee for that visit, but I understand that it was an informative trip. It followed a lot of helpful advice and updates that we have received over a period of time. The new crossing is a once-in-a-lifetime project. As such, it demands full parliamentary scrutiny and a level of accountability that can sometimes be lost when Governments commit to such big undertakings. The bill is essentially about how we manage the Forth road bridge and its connecting roads, which will continue to be an important part of our national infrastructure that will affect the local communities. As we have heard, the bill will abolish the Forth Estuary Transport Authority, transfer assets and liabilities to the Scottish ministers and redesignate the existing Forth road bridge as a trunk road. It will also allow for the transfer of staff under TUPE regulations, which is necessary in such circumstances. I draw members’ attention to some of the comments made by the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians and Unite—both unions that represent the workers concerned—which gave the committee their views on the process. In dissolving FETA, the Scottish ministers will tender for a new operating company, to which FETA’s workers will immediately transfer. However, the trade unions want to ensure that there is no erosion of their members’ rights in the process and that any changes are consistent with the letter and the spirit of the TUPE regulations. We expect that the maintenance contract will also go out to tender, and Unite seeks firm assurances that there will be no compulsory redundancies as a result, given the Scottish Government’s previous statements on the matter. Equally, UCATT is clear that it wants its members to continue to benefit from their membership of the Lothian Pension Fund. The Scottish Government has indicated that that will be guaranteed and that FETA workers will be granted admitted body status, even when they are transferred to the new contractor. I ask the Scottish Government to confirm that that is indeed the case and that steps are being taken to secure jobs and pensions on the Forth estuary. In light of the arguments made both by my Labour colleague Elaine Murray and by the City of Edinburgh Council, I also ask the Scottish Government to ensure that there is no dilution of scrutiny or accountability. The new forum that will be established in place of FETA will be officer led and not councillor led. Therefore, I can understand why local communities might feel that they are not being properly represented at a time of great change for the Forth estuary. I do not need to remind the minister that local people and businesses will have to live with the consequences of the decisions that we make today for many years to come. I stress the need for a joined-up approach to public procurement that is consistent with the wider procurement reform agenda. The current Forth road bridge is iconic, and will remain so for the rest of its lifetime. Just as it is important to create opportunities for workers on the replacement crossing, it is important to make the most of our existing infrastructure. When the new contract is awarded, I ask the Scottish Government to do all that it can to promote youth employment, local jobs and apprenticeships. I also ask it to do all that it can to eliminate blacklisting and to ensure that no firms that continue with such unfair practices receive public money. The bill has been introduced for understandable reasons, but there is a good case for further guarantees to give local workers and communities more confidence in the process at a time of significant change for all those who live by and work on the Forth.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with NHS Lanarkshire regarding the unscheduled care action plan. (S4O-02127)

I take this opportunity to impress on the Scottish Government the scale and urgency of the problem in accident and emergency units in Lanarkshire, where there were more than 11,000 breaches of the waiting times standard last year. Up to the middle of last month, 51 out of 73 of the longest waits—waits of more than 12 hours—in Lanarkshire occurred at Hairmyres hospital, and I have continued to receive reports of bed shortages and patients waiting beyond the four-hour target.

How exactly will the action plan help to bring down excessive waits in Lanarkshire, and what assurances can the cabinet secretary provide that he has a grip on the health service, after months of bad reports about waiting times in Lanarkshire emergency rooms?

I congratulate my colleague Margaret McDougall on securing this debate on the future of the marine research station at Millport. This is not only a topical issue in her region; it is also a matter of the utmost importance to the future of the island of Cumbrae, North Ayrshire and all the people who live and work there. In a small island community, the impact of any job losses, let alone 30, is significant. That is 30 fewer incomes being spent on the island, supporting the local economy and helping effectively to sustain the community, especially if those affected relocate to find work. I note from the motion that more than 1,000 students from universities throughout Scotland and England have travelled to Millport to use the station. I have no doubt that the loss of those visitors, too, would seriously affect local traders. Indeed, the whole economy of North Ayrshire could lose up to £2 million. As we have heard, the future of the research station at Millport is also of huge significance to the academic community. The facility is ideally placed in the Firth of Clyde, with a long and widely respected tradition of supporting internationally recognised research. Even today, with all the uncertainty over the future of the site, it continues to be regarded as a critical part of the country’s academic infrastructure and a key location for the study of marine biology, biodiversity and a range of related subjects. It would therefore appear that the decision by the University of London to withdraw funding is extremely unpopular and incredibly short-sighted. If we allow the marine station to close, we will fundamentally change the character of the local economy and the local community on Cumbrae, as well as losing a great asset to the sciences in Scotland and the UK. Earlier this year, more than 40 academics signed an open letter to the Scottish Government to ask for action on the marine station. I understand that a petition has gathered more than 13,000 signatures. I see that the education secretary is calling for all interested parties to work together to find an alternative to closure. I completely agree. However, the issue here is one of funding and sustainability. If the Scottish Government agrees, I hope that it will be prepared to step in and help the community to find a solution that works for the academic community and the isle of Cumbrae.

The Government’s motion refers to the fall in youth unemployment over 12 months and in my Central Scotland region there has been a drop in unemployment consistent with that trend. However, we must remember that the levels of youth unemployment in places such as Falkirk and Lanarkshire have remained above the national average for some time now and that the national average itself is still too high. Many of the communities that I represent are not just trying to cope with the rise in unemployment that came after the banking crash; they are still dealing with the legacy of unemployment and industrial decline over 30 years. Too many families and communities have experienced two or three generations of worklessness and, with levels of long-term unemployment remaining stubborn, this Government must work even harder to prevent a fourth. This afternoon I will talk not only about how we can raise employment levels but about how we can use training to help young people enter the labour market and secure continuing employment as—we hope—the economy recovers. I also want to stress the role of two different groups that, although absolutely crucial in responding to youth unemployment in Scotland, can often be overlooked: training providers and local authorities. The challenges confronting our universities and colleges have been well documented and others have spoken about the difficulties facing further education, in particular the impact of the Scottish Government’s disproportionate cuts to college budgets. According to Government statistics, however, more than 5 per cent of all those young people who reach positive destinations when they leave publicly funded secondary schools actually go straight into training, and many of those who become unemployed or go down other routes will also participate in some kind of training programme later in their lives. Although, historically, the Scottish Government and Skills Development Scotland have maintained a good relationship with Scotland’s training providers, that relationship appears to have become strained with the transition to the new employability fund, which effectively replaces get ready for work, training for work, the new college learning programme, targeted pathways to apprenticeships and the third sector challenge fund. That is a wide-ranging set of changes and my concern—and, as I understand it, the concern of many training providers—is that the change has been introduced without enough preparatory work or adequate consultation with the sector. Our young people deserve more than a rushed job. I am also concerned that the allocation of the employability fund is creating duplication and complications that need not exist. Training providers find the procurement process difficult enough and can all too easily be swamped when contracts go out to tender. At a time when the Scottish Government is trying to simplify public procurement, I cannot understand why it appears to be replacing a single funding agency with 32 different set-ups for 32 different authorities. Further to last week's debate on the voluntary sector, the Scottish Government agreed that there was a case for three-year funding and longer-term contracts, given that annual contracting can create uncertainty and make it difficult for charities to plan budgets. I must stress to the minister that extending the length of training contracts would remove a substantial and recurring administrative burden from training providers and help suppliers to budget for, say, property, training equipment and staffing costs. Surely we all want our training providers to be given the space to concentrate on what they do best: training. I must also stress the importance of local authorities, which play a crucial leadership role in developing their areas’ economic potential and boosting employment and training opportunities. We can learn a lot from best practice and partnership working at a local level. Indeed, there is no shortage of good examples from the three local authorities that my region covers and their key strategic partners. My future’s in Falkirk, North Lanarkshire’s working and South Lanarkshire works 4 u are three vital economic development initiatives that assist young people and local people more generally with job seeking and training. I emphasise the importance of wage subsidy by highlighting South Lanarkshire’s youth jobs fund, which provides a 50 per cent wage subsidy for up to 50 weeks for 16 and 17-year-olds; indeed, where it can, the council will even help employers with training costs. That great example has already been taken up by 80 different companies and we can learn from it if we are serious about intervening in the labour market and turning community jobs Scotland into what it should be—a new future jobs fund for Scotland. The minister talked about a very welcome decline in youth unemployment but we have some way to go if we are to bring those levels down further, learn from best practice and give young people the skills that they need to take advantage of the upturn when the recovery eventually comes.

6. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports manufacturing. (S4O-02070)

The Scottish Government will be aware of recent developments in South Lanarkshire and the Central Scotland region, including the report of the East Kilbride task force, which was set up after Rolls-Royce decided to withdraw from the town and has gained importance given the loss of manufacturing jobs at Jeyes. Does the Scottish Government believe that there is a case for a national manufacturing strategy to complement the economic strategy and to support regeneration and recovery in places such as Lanarkshire, which has the infrastructure and skills to become a competitive manufacturing location again?

I congratulate John Mason on securing the debate and bringing the topic of social tourism to the chamber. It was on 18 March 1999, just over 14 years ago in his Beveridge lecture, that Tony Blair committed the United Kingdom Government to eradicating child poverty by 2020. Government policy on child poverty has been debated and scrutinised ever since, and progress towards the 2020 target, under successive Administrations at Scottish and UK levels, has not always been consistent with Governments’ aspirations. There is a cross-party consensus, however, around the necessity of poverty reduction and social inclusion. Sadly, the pressures of being a carer, raising a sick or disabled child, being ill or disabled oneself and raising a family, being affected by a bereavement, living in damp or poor housing, or experiencing multiple types of deprivation can leave people shut out or feeling left behind. Here in the Scottish Parliament, we often debate the ways in which Government can make a material difference to families in that position, through taxation, welfare or public spending. There is also increasing recognition of the importance of early intervention and prevention. The evidence tells us that we can prevent illness and disadvantage in later life if we ensure that every child, no matter what their background, has a positive experience of childhood in a healthy and happy family. It is in that context that I stress the value of social tourism and the way in which holidays and leisure activities can bring families together. Social tourism can act as a form of prevention for older people, too—helping them to socialise and to lead active lives, and minimising the risk of illness in our ageing society, which is placing demands on the national health service. The growth of social tourism in Europe compared with its low profile in the UK suggests that it is an area in which we have some way to go in developing an infrastructure and good practice. Social tourism in the UK is largely supported by the voluntary sector, through a range of charities. I know that members across the Parliament all appreciate the work of those charities and the efforts of everyone who gives of their time and money to help to ensure that more families have the chance to enjoy a holiday together. For older people in many communities, churches and faith groups or other voluntary organisations can organise affordable outings and holidays, but they perhaps do not realise the true value of the experience. We can learn valuable lessons from mainland Europe about how the voluntary sector interacts with the public and private sectors to give social tourism the status that it deserves. There is more that we can do to determine the financial impact of social tourism in terms of what it contributes to the economy and what it saves in public spending on front-line services and the NHS. Opening up tourism to people who, due to their circumstances, cannot normally afford to travel and finance a holiday could create opportunities for the tourism trade in Scotland and abroad. Affordable out-of-season tourism might not be lucrative, but it could help hotels to fill empty rooms and it could boost footfall at visitor attractions during periods when visitor numbers are low. Not only would that help the industry; it could make a huge difference to the people concerned. It could improve their mental and physical wellbeing, it could strengthen family relationships and it could build happy memories through a positive shared experience. I once again congratulate John Mason on bringing the debate to the chamber, which has allowed us to raise the profile of social tourism and to discuss how it benefits the most excluded people in society.

What assurances can the minister provide that the Scottish Government will find sufficient resources to support the action plan of the East Kilbride task force, thereby helping to secure and promote the pre-eminent position of the town in the west of Scotland economy?

A great deal of uncertainty hangs over the future of the post office network in Scotland and across the UK. We must acknowledge that much of the uncertainty arises from a sense that the Government is not entirely forthcoming about its intentions for the service’s future. The Government said that post offices should be the front office for Government, but its record is one of reducing services and failing to provide the bankable contracts and firm guarantees that would put the Post Office on a secure footing. Given that context, I completely understand why trade unions, small businesses and service users are so concerned about the latest proposed changes, which will put Crown post offices at risk. The Post Office states that network transformation is not about closures but about franchising. However, if franchising means that Crown post offices move out of key town centre locations and that the overall level of service is reduced further, to be frank, I worry about the consequences for communities. Franchising of post offices is still uncommon, but it is by no means new. In 2011, Consumer Focus reported that franchised post offices were among the worst performing in the country on queue times and scored badly on measures of service, quality and accessibility. In addition, what happens if a franchisee finds that the post office is no longer commercially attractive? Can it just pull out and leave behind it a gap in service? Neither the Government nor the Post Office has done anything to suggest that it has learned from experience or put in place measures to stop a new commercial operator downgrading or closing its service later. However, that could happen in any of the 70 outlets that are affected, which account for 20 per cent of the Crown network and 770 post office workers across the UK. Those workers have already taken industrial action in opposition to the policy and to defend their terms and conditions. I will focus on what the changes will mean for local communities and in particular for our town centres. I do not need to tell anyone about the difficulties that our town centres face, which are not just the acute pressures associated with a retail slump and low aggregate demand but long-term pressures such as the rise of supermarkets, the growth in out-of-town retail and, more recently, the shift to online shopping. It is incumbent on the Post Office as a state-owned company to take an equally long-term view of how it adapts to change, so that it does not just respond to recent developments but shapes services for the future. It has been disappointing to see local authorities, public bodies and state-owned enterprises give up on town centre buildings and move to out-of-town locations, with no regard to the economic footprint that they leave behind. I hope that ministers in the Scottish and UK Governments can discourage that practice, especially when big employers or busy services are concerned. In East Kilbride, where I live, the post office is always busy and it attracts customers of all ages and backgrounds into our town centre because of the essential service that it provides. In doing so, the post office is not just proving its own viability but supporting other retailers, too. If that service were to be curtailed in any way or relocated to a less central location—even a busy supermarket—an important part of the community and the town centre that we all value would be displaced. The same can be said for post offices in other parts of my region and other parts of the country where the position of local town centres is far more fragile. The Post Office should be part of the solution to town centre regeneration and not part of the problem. In recent years, there has been a great deal of restructuring in the Post Office and the Royal Mail to secure the service for the future. Let me be clear that I am not against reform and that I accept that the Post Office must strengthen its financial position. However, franchising will in effect lead to the closure of major stand-alone post offices in town centres and high streets and will set back town centres when we should be trying to regenerate those vital public places and take them forward. I join the CWU in appealing for the United Kingdom Government to end its ambivalence towards our post offices and support the service, which is vital to many of our communities.

11. To ask the Scottish Government how it is monitoring the introduction of the employability fund. (S4O-01995)

Throughout the chamber, members all agree that there should be a relentless focus on youth employment. I emphasise that again today. However, I ask the minister how the employability fund and the Government’s wider skills strategy will help low-skilled unemployed people of all ages, including adults who are trying to re-enter a difficult labour market and people who have recently been made redundant.

I welcome the opportunity to debate the proposed procurement reform bill and the wider procurement agenda, which is—I am glad to say—at last being given the prominence that it deserves in Parliament. As has been indicated, annual spending through public procurement stands at £9.2 billion, rising to £11 billion. How we spend that money through public contracts and how those contracts are shaped have a direct impact on the economy. Therefore a new bill, tied to a wider series of reforms, gives Parliament the chance to make a real difference. We have the chance to follow the lead of Labour-led South Lanarkshire Council and others in challenging the injustice of blacklisting. We have the chance to promote decent wages, sustainable growth and a living wage, and to make the procurement framework in this country more business friendly and socially responsible. I will flesh out that last point. I agree with all those who replied to the Scottish Government’s consultation by saying that public procurement can be an economic lever and a driver of real change. I argue for a responsible pro-growth public procurement framework that supports employment, helps recovery and is fair for Scotland’s workers and small businesses. The Scottish Chambers of Commerce, in its response to the Government’s consultation, was clear that in a stagnant economy the importance of public sector contracts to Scottish businesses cannot be overestimated. That is why public procurement must be sensitive to the immediate needs of Scottish firms as well as to the wider drive to build a stronger, more responsible and sustainable economy. This might not be entirely evident from the Government’s analysis of its consultation, but there is a consensus about what is wrong with public procurement that unites a range of respondents from left to right. The most significant contracts are bundled into orders that are so large that Scotland-based small and medium-sized enterprises cannot possibly tender for them and have to subcontract. Big firms can win big contracts, cream off the best bits and leave small businesses with the scraps. Our interpretation of EU rules is too narrow and our adherence to that interpretation is too strict. The public sector is being deskilled and hollowed out of specialists who actually understand complex contracts. If the bill does not address those points comprehensively, it will have failed not only to match the Government’s rhetoric, but to meet the needs of the economy. By procuring better, we can support Scottish firms, but with major contracts in which a significant amount of public money has been invested, we should go further. The £11 billion that we spend through procurement each year is more than a simple transaction; it is public money that could and should deliver wider benefits to Scotland. The bill should therefore do more than require those who are in receipt of major Government contracts to publish training and apprenticeships plans and to consider what might be achieved through community benefit clauses. The bill should set out clearly how firms that are in receipt of such contracts can bring jobs, training and apprenticeships into communities. That should be backed up by achievable targets and statutory requirements, with a clear system for monitoring progress against those requirements so that suppliers know that there will be consequences if they do not fulfil their community benefit clauses. I want to deal with contracts in more detail because, although the Government can do more with the new bill, it can also do a lot within the existing rules. The public sector is committed to being a good customer that pays its invoices on time, although perhaps it could do better. Contractors also have responsibilities and the construction sector tells us that late payments can be crippling. The Government’s biggest contractors can expect payment within 28 days, but subcontractors can wait for up to 90 days for the money to work its way down to them. That is why I was pleased to hear the minister mention project bank accounts. The Government should also consider whether awarding contracts annually is always best. Forward planning is critical to the viability of small businesses, training providers and the third sector, which have all kinds of costs for matters such as staffing, property leases and equipment. We need to take their difficulties into account. The bill and the procurement reform agenda are not just about businesses in Scotland; they are about how we do business in Scotland. I hope that, with some listening and dialogue and with a bit more ambition, the Scottish Government can move us towards a more business friendly and responsible public procurement framework.

I appreciate the opportunity to speak in the debate and to contribute to the wider discussion about Scotland’s future. My position is now, and has been, that Scotland is best served by devolution—a Scottish Parliament within a United Kingdom—but I also count myself among the majority of people in Scotland who feel that our life and politics would be enhanced if we had a stronger Parliament within a more modern and flexible union. We learned last week that devo max is not any more popular than independence, but in their report on attitudes to constitutional alternatives John Curtice and Rachel Ormston found that there was a clear majority in support of key financial decisions being taken in Scotland. Whatever Scotland’s constitutional destination, the economics of change and the implications for the public finances will be absolutely critical. It is important that all of us in the Parliament take a sober, considered view of Scotland’s financial position—especially those of us who advocate significant constitutional change, who range from people who argue for independence to people like me who support the devolution of further financial powers. It can be quite revealing to take a considered look at Scotland’s finances. The UK figure for total expenditure per capita is £10,937, whereas the Scottish figure is £12,134. As we all know, the UK faces a net fiscal deficit, but so does Scotland, even with a geographical share of oil revenues. Critically, Scotland’s geographical share of oil revenues was almost a fifth of its total revenue. I will return to that point. Much of the debate has centred on oil wealth and tax revenues from oil and gas. Indeed, much of the constitutional debate since the 1970s has focused on those same issues. In my opinion, the very fact that oil and gas are so central to the constitutional debate and the arguments for independence that are being deployed is in itself significant. It underlines a critical point that has been made for many years: the financial case for independence, as articulated to us by the Scottish Government, hinges on a single volatile commodity. Let us be clear: no one disputes the opportunities that oil and gas afford Scotland, especially given the sector’s importance to the north-east. Despite claims to the contrary from the First Minister and Aileen McLeod, no one in the Parliament views oil wealth as a curse. However, the centrality of the North Sea in the vision of Scotland’s future that the Scottish Government is developing points to a Scotland that is not just buoyed by but tied to oil wealth. That is at odds with my vision of a diverse and dynamic economy. Of course we must develop key growth industries such as oil and gas, but we must also look at the resilience of the economy as a whole and at how wealth is dispersed in Scotland. A range of business sectors—including small and medium-sized enterprises, manufacturing and retail—are important to our economic potential as well as our tax base and they are being overlooked in the contest over Scotland’s future. SMEs are contending with some of the most difficult trading conditions that they have ever seen, and yet the Government has put off its rates revaluation and has chosen to sustain rates at near boom levels.

No—I am taking no interventions. Manufacturers are closing down in places such as my home town—East Kilbride—and there is no Government strategy to do anything about that. Retail accounts for 9 per cent of total employment, but it is not included in the Government’s economic strategy. The Scottish Government must address fundamental concerns that people and businesses have here and now about how Scotland’s financial position will be sustained and strengthened, whatever future the people of this country ultimately decide on. An independent Scotland might be viable, but nothing in the GERS figures or the oil figures makes the UK redundant or in any way less viable. I totally oppose the present UK Government’s policies, but I believe that the essential case for Scotland in the union remains convincing. Together, as part of the United Kingdom, we can bear bigger deficits than smaller nations can. We can nationalise banks, which we had to do in response to the global financial crisis to save jobs, savings and mortgages. In comparison with new economies that are yet to mature, we can borrow relatively cheaply to invest. Scotland standing on its own two feet faces opportunities and challenges like any other nation—not least the budget challenge that was identified in the leaked Cabinet memo.

Equally, the prospects, security and solidarity that come to Scotland from being part of a strong and successful union should not be readily dismissed or denied, if we are to have an honest debate about Scotland’s future.

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether the second report on proposals and policies will contain marine issues that were not previously included. (S4O-01909)

Will the Scottish Government outline the research and data collection steps that are being taken towards a sound proposal for blue carbon? I understand that it could match the contribution of peatlands in tackling climate change. What timescales can be attached to any proposals?

For the avoidance of doubt, I make it clear that I will vote for the Labour amendment. Often when we debate capital spend in the chamber, we find ourselves discussing the mismatch between what the Government would like to spend its money on and what it can realistically budget for. However, that is not all that we are discussing today, because the Scottish budget is under severe pressure in both resource departmental expenditure limit and capital. The austerity measures imposed by the UK Treasury are excessive and are sucking the life out of the Scottish and UK economies. Most parties in the chamber, though not all, believe that the chancellor has got it wrong, that it is time for another fiscal stimulus and that a renewed push for growth is long overdue. There was a welcome boost for capital projects from the autumn statement, but public spending on capital remains diminished. Therefore, if the Scottish Government wants to meet its ambitions for infrastructure, it will have to look beyond public budgets. Frankly, the Scottish Government finds itself in the same position as previous Administrations in Holyrood and at Westminster, or as so many of our local authorities during the Thatcher era, because it must leverage private sector investment into public works if it is to have the slightest chance of realising its ambitions. That is precisely why NPD, just like all the other public-private partnerships that we have known over the years, is so critical. If I can communicate anything to members today, it will be to stress the urgency of the need for capital investment and job creation in the economy, and the on-going importance of the NPD pipeline. Be in no doubt that the business community will have been watching the infrastructure investment plan and the NPD pipeline, and that some parts of it will be listening to the minister’s remarks today. I am afraid that what we have heard in the chamber will not have reassured the business community or construction firms that Scottish ministers understand the urgency of the calls for investment, or that they are developing the shovel-ready pipeline that we have been promised. I do not think that we have heard a single convincing reason for the NPD pipeline delivering so little, given that we were promised so much. I started by saying that today’s debate is about more than the mismatch between what the Government wants to do and what it can do within its budget; it is about the mismatch between what the Scottish Government can budget for and what is actually being spent and delivered. We were promised that £353 million would be invested in NPD projects in 2012-13, but the figure turned out to be £20 million. We were told that £686 million would be invested in NPD projects in 2013-14, but the recent budget confirmed that plans have been scaled back to £338 million. When the Finance Committee asked for an explanation for that reduction, it was told that it was taking longer than anticipated to develop projects and proceed to procurement. When will the proposed procurement reform bill become an act? The Scottish economy does not have a great deal to gain from taking projects out of development hell just to pass them into a protracted and cumbersome public procurement framework. I remind members that Michael Levack, from the Scottish Building Federation, told the Finance Committee that too many capital projects are “stuck in the constipated public sector procurement system”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 26 September 2012; c 1618.] If the procurement reform bill is to make a substantial difference to Scottish businesses it must be introduced in the Parliament without further delay, so that we can legislate to unclog the system.

I begin by thanking all the members from across the chamber who signed my motion on retail in Scotland and allowed this debate to take place. As the motion states, retail makes an “important contribution ... to the Scottish economy through investment in skills, jobs and ... communities”, not just in my region but across Scotland. Retail accounts for 9 per cent of all employment in Scotland, which makes it the biggest source of private sector employment in the country. The sector continues to contribute to the economy, even in these tough times. However, no one would dispute that retail has been rocked by two recessions and the threat of a third, and by a longer-term shift to online shopping. Let me be clear: I do not take a rose-tinted view of retail. It is a sector in which levels of pay and union organisation could be higher, but we have to celebrate good practice and recognise investment in the workforce where it takes place if we are to bring out the best in one of the country’s largest employing sectors. That is why I welcome the Scottish Retail Consortium’s report on retail jobs, which provides a snapshot of the retail sector and gives some insight into how employers develop their people. Before I address the substance of the report, I want to reflect on where the Scottish retail sector finds itself. Consumer spending patterns change over the Christmas period and the January sales, and we had positive sales growth in December, but the overall picture across the year is not as encouraging. Indeed, the SRC has confirmed that sales growth was negative in Scotland in 2012. Perhaps more worrying is the fact that consumer confidence in Scotland is significantly lower than in the United Kingdom as a whole. That underlines the need to restore confidence in the economy’s prospects and give some semblance of security to hard-pressed consumers if we are to put the Scottish economy back on the right track. However, reports of more high street casualties over the past few weeks—Jessops, Blockbuster and HMV—make it difficult to rebuild confidence in an economy that is simply not growing as it should. There is an on-going debate about the extent to which retail drives growth and the level to which it benefits from the disposable income of those who are employed in other sectors. However, it is indisputable that consumer confidence has a bearing on retail employment and the sector can go on to contribute more if we secure for Scotland a more confident and resilient economy. There are good reasons for doing that, which go beyond the normal economic arguments. The retail sector is a flexible employer and many of the part-time and flexible job opportunities that it offers attract women, young people and those with family lives or other commitments to work around. As we have seen, a drop in retail employment adversely affects women and young people in an economy in which they are already at a disadvantage. In suburban communities such as those that I represent, retail often provides young people with their first experience of the labour market. In the report, major employers such as Boots, Sainsbury’s, John Lewis and Tesco outline how they bring workers into their organisations and develop them. Since the debate was scheduled, I have received communication from Asda, which was keen to brief me on the initiatives that it is undertaking, such as its national skills academy and modern apprenticeships. In my professional life as a training consultant, I had a number of trainees in retail. It struck me that, with the right people and the right training, someone can progress from an entry-level position to management more easily and much sooner than in other sectors. Indeed, one of the stories in the report is that of Sarah, who joined McDonald’s while still at school. She went on to become a shift manager and continues to progress through that organisation. When workers have the right mix of autonomy and responsibility, backed up with training, they can go on to become more than just good workers; they can go on to become valued citizens of an organisation. Workers who feel valued and responsible are often among the most productive. Work in retail is not about the most basic level of customer assistance. It should be about knowing the product and the workplace, so that the worker has the knowledge and skills that they require to be able to anticipate their customers’ needs. Such a workplace culture does not come about by accident; it takes intervention by the employer. A connected issue is the future of Scotland’s town centres. Last night, there was a meeting of the proposed new cross-party group on towns and town centres. I was overwhelmed by the response that the proposal received. Many contributors to the Scottish Government’s on-going review of town centres attended the meeting. They are keen to open up another forum for debate. Lively discussion is taking place on the issue and contributors include the Centre for Scottish Public Policy, Scotland’s Towns Partnership and Malcolm Fraser and his external advisory group. Retail is changing rapidly, with consequences for town centres and local economies. In my region, we have town centres that have gained business improvement district status, such as Hamilton and Falkirk, we have covered shopping centres in East Kilbride and Cumbernauld, and we have more high streets and traditional town centres than I could name in the time that I have left. The regeneration of all those town centres is about more than just retail. A variety of uses could help to breathe new life into our precious public spaces. However, town centres will always have to capture some of the wealth and jobs that retail creates, if they are to survive and flourish. When the report of the Fraser review has been published and the Scottish Government is deciding how to respond, I hope that the Government will take on board the fact that retail accounts for 5 per cent of UK gross domestic product. I thank all members who are attending the debate. Retail is a vital employer in every constituency and region, so I hope that members agree that today’s debate presents a useful opportunity for us to reflect on how the sector is changing and what that means for employment in Scotland.

This is not the first time that I have spoken in Parliament about youth employment, and it is certainly not the first time that Parliament has considered a motion on the subject but, to the best of my knowledge, this is the first time that we have in this session held a debate on the topic that places such a strong focus on the employer. I therefore thank James Dornan for bringing the debate to the chamber and for allowing us to take a considered look at how employers can help to create opportunities for young people. I welcome Skills Development Scotland’s make young people your business campaign. I hope that it will make employers think more about how they can be part of the solution to youth unemployment. The case studies that the campaign is highlighting prove that taking on a young person who has little or no work history does not have to be a burden. Young people can bring fresh talent, real energy and a unique perspective to any market—especially markets in which the pace of change is quick. In putting its case to employers, SDS reminds us that, although work placements do not necessarily lead to a guaranteed job, they can be a great trial run for employers. It tells us that young people are among the country’s most flexible workers and are often able to commit to work patterns that other staff may be unable to commit to, and that young people are more likely to stick with an employer who has invested in their training needs from the very start and supported their on-going development. SSE plc, Stoddart’s of Broxburn and Diageo have all made it clear that recruiting young people can add value to a business. Members may also be aware of the youth with hope initiative, which was launched last year by Sir Willie Haughey with the support of businesses and entrepreneurs from across the country. The youth with hope initiative encourages firms to employ at least one new young person as a green champion. The organisers envisage that the post will be self-financing, effectively being paid for through reductions to energy bills. Employers need to hear such positive and practical messages in these hard times. Different parties bring different ideas to Parliament about how to tackle youth unemployment, but across the chamber we all recognise the central role that employers must play. That is why we have to change attitudes. That is why we have to promote the job readiness of young people who are poised to enter the labour market and why we have to make every effort to educate and train those who are not. That is why the campaign is so important—to our economy as it is now, and to our country as it will be in the future. I record my appreciation for the work of SDS and the UK Commission for Employment and Skills, for a positive and well-informed campaign to help young people into work. The Joseph Rowntree Foundation reports that levels of youth unemployment have doubled since the start of the global financial crisis in 2008. It confirms that there are now 90,000 young people out of work in Scotland and that the jobless rate for under-25s far exceeds the unemployment rate more generally. I want to draw members’ attention to two areas where I feel that the Scottish Government could make a difference. First, I stress that in some parts of Scotland as many as 20 people are chasing every job. Before we can aspire to full employment again, we need to address the fundamental problems with the economy. There has to be co-ordinated investment in job creation and a further capital injection to lift aggregate demand. Secondly, we need to give unemployed young people—many of whom have never worked before—a worthwhile and rewarding experience in the workplace. Too many young people cannot get a job because they do not have experience, but do not have experience because they cannot get a job. I know that the coalition’s work programme has been under fire in recent months, but we cannot tar all work experience opportunities with the same brush. As a former training consultant, I know that getting the right trainee into the right placement can break the cycle of unemployment and transform young lives. That is what I have been trying to do with South Lanarkshire College in my area, by matching up students on the college learning programme with leading national employers that are offering fantastic work experience opportunities. I thank James Dornan again for bringing the debate to the chamber. I fully expect that there will be plenty more opportunities to discuss this important issue in the weeks and months ahead.

Earlier this week, energy bill revolution, a campaign of more than 100 businesses, charities and activists, issued an open letter to the Prime Minister to warn of the “national disgrace” that is fuel poverty. The campaign estimates that 6 million families are living in fuel poverty today and that, rather than coming down, the figure is actually going up and will reach 9 million by 2016. The campaign claims that Government schemes are simply not enough at a time of economic difficulty and rising energy prices. My concern is that many of the criticisms that the campaign has levelled at the UK Government are also relevant in Scotland. The Scottish fuel poverty forum says that three main factors determine levels of fuel poverty: the energy efficiency of homes; energy prices; and household income. Too many people in Scotland today live in cold homes with their bills going up faster than their incomes. It is perhaps useful to reflect on how the combination of those factors can shape the experiences and daily lives of people who are already struggling. In these troubled times, in which we are much more aware of climate change than ever before, we all ration our energy usage, but stories about pensioners on fixed incomes or families struggling to get by who are switching off—not because they want to keep their bills down, but because they have to do so—are challenging and troubling. We should not tolerate an injustice that can leave people on low incomes in cold, damp houses, unable to pay their bills and afraid to use their heating and appliances. No citizen of our country should ever be forced to choose between heating and eating, especially during spells of cold weather such as the conditions that we are experiencing this week. There is consensus about the nature of fuel poverty but, as we have been hearing, there is still debate about how we prioritise solutions. The Government’s motion refers to retrofitting of homes—a point supported by the existing homes alliance—so that we can raise energy efficiency standards in existing homes as well as in new-build developments. In the budget debate yesterday, we heard the case for allocating, in full, the capital spending consequentials arising from the autumn statement towards housing. Boosting investment in housing would not only help to get the construction sector moving and bring down waiting lists; spending extra cash on retrofitting would make our existing housing stock more sustainable and would help to liberate some of Scotland’s many hard-pressed families from the injustice of fuel poverty. The UK Government has to be challenged as well. The Prime Minister and the energy secretary have to show that they are serious about reform of the energy market. The disconnect and distrust between energy companies and their customers have never been greater. Without a radical overhaul of the energy market, the gulf will grow wider. Some of my Labour colleagues in the UK Parliament have suggested that, if we are to restore confidence in energy markets, Ofgem should be replaced with a newer, tougher regulator—a watchdog with real teeth and the bite to match. Where it has been established that energy companies have abused their position in the market, the regulator should be able to do more than dish out a slap on the wrist. It should be able to force price cuts on to bill payers and it should be prepared to shine a light on the practices of energy companies and act as a strong advocate for consumers. Other solutions are being developed commercially, which could have a bearing on fuel poverty and energy consumption in years to come. I recently attended an open day and innovation fair at ID Systems in Central Scotland. It brought together companies from throughout the water industry, the oil and gas sector and manufacturing. I saw a demonstration for Umax, which is a liquid additive to central heating systems that changes the property of water to keep boilers from running too often and lowers fuel use. It was a simple demonstration but the lesson that I took from it is that, with some creativity and innovation, we can find new solutions as we grapple with complex problems. Innovation and enterprise might not fall within the purview of the housing minister but she may wish to speak to some of her colleagues in other departments to ensure that the Government is following the good work of Scotland’s innovators and entrepreneurs, especially given the impetus to find products that make energy more affordable. If household income is a key determinant of whether a family will experience fuel poverty, welfare cuts—which hit those in work as well as those who are out of work—almost certainly guarantee that levels of fuel poverty in Scotland will rise. In that context, the role of the Scottish Government becomes all the more important in ensuring that welfare rights advice and the energy assistance package are well used and properly promoted to those most in need. Fuel poverty has been with us in Scotland for too long, and I fear that it will be with us for some time to come. Both of Scotland’s Parliaments share a genuine concern about fuel poverty, but my appeal to Government today is that it should recognise its shared responsibility for finding a sustainable way forward.

In my area, people must accept a cut in their housing benefit because of a lack of one-bedroom properties. When I asked the Government for figures on such properties’ availability, I was told that no such figures are held centrally. How will the £50 million that has been announced today alleviate shortages of affordable one-bedroom homes and help households that are faced with the double whammy of welfare cuts from Westminster and housing cuts in the cabinet secretary’s spending review?

Water is more than a prized natural resource; it is an essential that we cannot do without and a resource on which key industries such as agriculture, food and drink, manufacturing and the energy sector all depend. We should never underestimate the value of our water; equally, its value should not simply be measured in pounds and pence or even just in terms of what it can contribute to the economy. The sound management of Scotland’s water resources brings social and environmental benefits that are not easily quantified but which are nonetheless important to who we are and how we live. Too many people around the world confront barriers that prevent them from accessing clean drinking water, let alone water for any other purpose. Those barriers are heightened by climate change, rising global demand and globalisation. Even here in the United Kingdom, there are parts of these islands where demand outstrips supply. Scotland is water rich, but, because of their high population density, our nearest neighbours in England and Wales face water scarcity not unlike that experienced by some Mediterranean countries. Drought occurs on average every seven years in England and Wales, especially after the country goes through a dry winter, as it has now done for two or three years in a row. That is the backdrop against which the bill is being taken forward, which is why the decisions that we take about our water in the next few weeks and about the stewardship of that resource in future are so important. The bill should lead to a framework not just for managing our water, but for realising the full value of the resource—for the benefit of Scotland. In that context, the bill refers to “economic and other benefits”. I support calls for greater clarity on that point, so I appreciate the cabinet secretary’s earlier remarks and I look forward to the amendment. If by “other benefits” the Government means social and environmental benefits, as the cabinet secretary indicated, it should be explicit about that in the bill. Innovation and creativity in how we manage our water can not just contribute to the economy but improve our environment and communities. The committee will welcome that simple but significant amendment to the bill. I associate myself with members who have welcomed new rights for people who seek to repair septic tanks in common ownership, new access rights for people who monitor water quality and new offences in relation to the illegal passing into the sewer network of substances such as fats and acids. The Scottish Government must clarify what it means by economic benefit and how it expects Scottish Water and the Scottish ministers to secure such benefit. We all agree that Scottish Water should be an efficient, competitive and high-performing organisation, but if we are serious about an all-Scotland recovery and about pulling together to build up our shared prosperity, we must examine Scottish Water’s role in the wider economy. Scottish Water is a publicly owned corporation and I do not accept that it can contribute to the nation’s economic success only if it is privatised. If it has an ambitious framework and there is the possibility of further reform in the new year, Scottish Water can make its considerable budget go further and treat public procurement as a way of delivering jobs and new opportunities in Scotland, rather than just a transaction. In response to the consultation on the bill, Jim and Margaret Cuthbert pointed out that of the 16 partners who deliver Scottish Water’s capital investment programme, only three are Scottish firms. Even if firms employ people in Scotland, the involvement of foreign-owned firms, along with the outsourcing of key Scottish Water functions such as R and D and design and construction, is stripping skills and experience out of the Scottish economy. As we await the introduction of the procurement bill in the new year, we should reflect on what “economic benefit” means and on how a new framework for Scottish Water will help Scotland to retain its world-leading position in the field. Many responses to the consultation and submissions to the committee were thoughtful and helpful. I hope that the Government will continue to take on board the points that have been made, particularly in relation to the meaning of “value” and “economic benefit”. Scotland’s water is one of our greatest and most abundant natural resources. Precisely because that resource is so crucial, I reiterate to the cabinet secretary the need for clarity and caution as the bill proceeds through the Parliament.

I thank Margaret Mitchell for bringing the debate to the chamber. The vision and the purpose behind the Samaritans are enduring. They aim to ensure that, with some listening and empathy, fewer people in society will choose to take their own life. As Margaret Mitchell said, the Samaritans are largely a voluntary organisation in Lanarkshire, where the service is provided by more than 70 volunteers and where there are no full-time staff. That is remarkable given the nature of the service that is provided and the training that the organisation puts its volunteers through. Being able to listen to what someone who is in distress is saying—and not saying—is an invaluable skill in any walk of life. It takes particular mental strength and courage to empathise with people who are going through an experience that many of us could barely begin to imagine and to do so in a fair-minded and non-judgmental way. We should certainly mark and celebrate today the fact that people in our community are willing to give up their time for others and face such demands. Figures show that the suicide rate has reduced slightly since 2000, but there were still 772 suicides last year, when the rate for men was three times that for women. Ten years after the launch of the choose life initiative, suicide is still most common among young to middle-aged men. In my experience, I can think of three awful, heartbreaking cases of suicide. Each case involved a young man whose best years were still ahead of him. Each of those young men had much to live for, even if they could not see it. The Government’s thinking and the thinking of the Samaritans and other voluntary organisations are still aligned in accepting that such deaths can be prevented, if only people realise that they are not alone. We must encourage people to talk about their thoughts and feelings more often and not just when they reach the stage of contemplating suicide. That is a challenge. In one sense, that is a cultural change for us. We are a warm and welcoming nation, but we are not necessarily in the habit of talking about ourselves, our vulnerabilities and our health. That is why impartial services that can listen and advise—not just the Samaritans, but other services such as Breathing Space and a range of advocacy, advice and support groups—are vital. I note from the motion that the Lanarkshire branch assists people through email and SMS text messaging, as well as through more traditional forms of communication. That suggests that the service is adaptable and open to change, although the core principles and the central mission behind the Samaritans have always remained consistent. When the choose life programme was launched, the Scottish Executive embraced new thinking and decided that a suicide prevention strategy should not work in isolation but be based on promoting public health and mental wellbeing, with the active involvement of key partners. We as a society still face a challenge in reducing the suicide rate, but I maintain that the decision to approach the issue as a public health matter was right. However, we could look again at how funding is distributed to voluntary sector partners and, if we are to support fully the crucial life-saving work of organisations such as the Samaritans, we could do more to improve engagement between the statutory sector and the voluntary sector. I hope that, in 40 years, we as a society have developed a better understanding of suicide prevention that makes us more open and can inform public policy. Throughout that period, there has always been a place for the Samaritans and their vital work. I am happy to join other members in congratulating them on their service to people in Lanarkshire and across Scotland.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what impact the affordable housing supply programme will have on levels of poverty. (S4O-01508)

In evidence to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, Shelter Scotland said that the combination of aggressive welfare reform and a 45 per cent cash-terms reduction in affordable housing expenditure over the spending review period amounts to “a real one-two knockout punch for low-income families”.—[Official Report, Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, 24 October 2012; c 970.] The United Kingdom Government has got it wrong on the budget and on welfare reforms, but will the Scottish ministers accept that they have got it wrong in presenting an affordable housing budget that has been cut so much that social landlords are now faced with an impossible choice of putting up rents or putting the brakes on house building altogether? Why should the Scottish budget be balanced on the backs of those who are in the most need?

Does the member agree that hospitality should be regarded as a profession, as is the case in France, and should be treated as such by schools, careers services and further and higher education?

I welcome the opportunity to speak on this topic and to discuss how we can make Scotland the world-class destination that we all know it can be. This is not the first debate on tourism in which I have participated. However, it is the first that I can remember that has focused specifically on business tourism, which is a potential source of growth in the economy, a key component of any successful events strategy and another way in which we can showcase the very best of Scotland to the world. Exhibitions, trade fairs, meetings and conferences, product launches, corporate functions and even corporate hospitality at big events, from pop concerts to cup finals, all bring people together. Those gatherings not only generate income for local economies, but bring a wider benefit, because the deals and transactions that are done and the contacts that are made can contribute to the growth and success of businesses further down the line. Many of the critical factors behind the success of business tourism are not any different to the factors behind the success of the tourism industry as a whole, even in these difficult times for the economy. We all want to give all visitors to our country a good Scottish welcome because we want them to come back, and we want everyone in the service sector who deals with the public—from taxi drivers to hotel porters—to do their bit to make people comfortable and to project a positive image of the country. We have to get the marketing strategy right, not just at national level but at local level. As I have said before, VisitLanarkshire.com is the product of a strong collaboration between the visitor accommodation sector and visitor attractions, and it is a model of partnership working from which other parts of Scotland could learn. We must ensure that our workforce has the right mix of skills not just in customer service and hospitality, but in events management, advertising and modern languages. The Confederation of British Industry and Scottish Enterprise have both warned that, because Scotland is falling behind in language education, we are losing out on income and investment, which could be costing the Scottish economy as much as £500 million per year. We must raise our game on modern languages. I welcome the suggestion that foreign languages should be introduced to children at an early age in education, and that an additional language should be introduced as they progress through school. We must be conscious that, if we are to shift the focus of our exporters towards the BRIC—Brazil, Russia, India and China—nations and other emerging economies, our language courses and wider understanding of foreign cultures must become more diverse. We will always teach the major European languages such as French and Spanish, but the case for teaching other languages such as Portuguese and Russian is stronger than ever. A world-class destination needs world-class infrastructure; connectivity in Scotland and between Scotland and other key destinations is central to our future prosperity. There must be joined-up thinking in our approach to tourism and to transport, as there is in many other countries. High speed 2 will reduce journey times between Scotland and London, and a high-speed connection between Glasgow and Edinburgh will be a great boost to one of our most valuable transport corridors. However, I remain unconvinced that the reductions in the Edinburgh to Glasgow rail improvement programme amount to savings; they are, in fact, cuts that total £350 million, which will mean that electrification will be put on hold and critical enhancements to the capacity of the rail line will be scrapped. If we are serious—

Let me continue. If we are serious about developing this high-value sector and realising all its potential, we need transport links that sit at the top of the league and are up there with the best in the world. There are real legacy benefits to having a strong and competitive business tourism industry. Venues that are central to the success of business tourism have helped to regenerate city centres across the United Kingdom, breathing new life into spaces that were neglected after the decline of traditional industries. Big national events can produce substantial gains that last longer than the events themselves. I worked on the Glasgow garden festival in the 1980s. It was a great event and it marked a real turning point for the city, but for a number of reasons—not least the economic problems of the late 1980s—much of the land remained derelict until relatively recently. As we develop the venues and the infrastructure that we need to grow the business tourism end of the industry, we must be prepared to invest and to innovate to secure lasting benefits for our economy. As the Government does, I recognise the growing contribution that business tourism is making to the Scottish economy. Business tourism can add value in all seasons and in all kinds of ways, and it can leave a legacy of regeneration, growth and new opportunities. The challenge for the Government is to support the sector through these tough times and to plan for better times by helping Scotland to secure the skills, the infrastructure and the investment that we need if we are truly to be one of the best destinations in the world.

With NHS Lanarkshire’s performance against the accident and emergency four-hour waiting times standard down in August of this year and continuing to worsen, and with eight-hour and 12-hour waits still a persistent problem, will the cabinet secretary ensure that he raises the issue with NHS Lanarkshire and looks again at the staffing situation for the provision of minor injuries services?

In my professional life before I came to the Parliament, I was a training consultant and also an external verifier for the Scottish Qualifications Authority. Most of my career was spent working with people to help them to train for employment and improve their skills, but I also assessed training providers and monitored how they delivered qualifications. My career took me to colleges all over Scotland, and over the past 18 months I have been working with colleges in my region, listening to them as they go through this period of transition, helping them to find valuable work experience opportunities and getting them more involved in the community. I am every bit as aware of the sector’s shortcomings as I am of its strengths and achievements. I agree that reform is needed and I welcome a sharper focus on employment. I hope that colleges in every part of Scotland will build meaningful partnerships with employers and other providers in their local communities, guiding us back towards full employment. However, the good work that our colleges do and that the Scottish Government wants them to do is being undermined because of the spending reductions, which are entirely disproportionate. Not only were colleges hit hard in last year’s budget, but the pressures are on-going. Scotland’s Colleges has warned members of a cut in the teaching grant of almost £73 million since 2010-11, and the grant is expected to fall again next year. There is a serious drive for efficiency in the sector, but cuts of almost 16 per cent in such a short period cannot be delivered through efficiencies. The structural changes that colleges are going through, which are leading to mergers in some parts of the country and a federation of colleges in Lanarkshire, are expected to deliver long-term savings, but there can be no doubt that they present an immediate challenge. We have heard today about Audit Scotland’s report, and I agree that we need to know where the savings are to be found and exactly how they are to be delivered. However, we also need to know much more about how the reforms and the Government’s budget decisions will impact on those who depend the most on the opportunities that a college education can provide. More than 30 per cent of college students come from the most deprived parts of Scotland. The majority are women, at a time when women’s employment has been hit hard by the recession, and the average age of male college students is just 20 at a time when the country faces a crisis of youth employment. My fear is that the rush to reform at the same time as budgets are being slashed so severely will compromise provision for those who need it most, when they need it most. Earlier this year, the Scottish Government announced a new employability fund, transferring £24 million from the Scottish funding council to SDS to replace the new college learning programme. In my experience, that programme has been one of the most positive and interesting initiatives to be developed in response to the youth jobs crisis in Scotland. It consists of 192 hours of college learning and 192 hours of work experience, with an employability certificate at the end of the course and, for some learners, the opportunity to progress into work. The programme depends in many ways on the participation of employers who are willing to offer placements. Working with South Lanarkshire College, I secured the participation of First Bus and ScotRail, and right now young people in my region are going through job-focused employability courses. I am looking forward to meeting the current group of students at the end of the course, so that they can tell me about their experiences and I can take a balanced view but, with the introduction of the employability fund, it looks as if changes are being made before the programme has had a chance to bed in. I ask the Scottish Government to explain why the programme has changed so soon, what the differences between the new college learning programme and the employability fund will be, and how those positive initiatives are affected by the wider programme of college reforms. Scotland’s colleges are under pressure as never before just when they are needed the most. Their work has never been so vital, yet their future has never been so unclear. The message that goes out from the Parliament today must be that we recognise our colleges’ contribution and that we will support them and their students through these tough times.

If anything should focus minds on this debate, it is the reported road casualty figures that we have been hearing from Transport Scotland: 750 casualties and 20 deaths on Scotland’s roads have been attributed to drink-driving in one year alone. This is not the first time that we as a Parliament have debated Scotland’s relationship with alcohol, but it is the first time that we have done so with the power to determine the drink-drive limit. We have a choice to make and when we make it we have to keep the safety and wellbeing of the Scottish people foremost in our minds. We are approaching the festive period and every year at this time the Scottish Government and its partners in the police mount a campaign to remind Christmas partygoers about the consequences of drink-driving. In 2010, 7,000 people were caught driving under the influence of drink or drugs, and the figures spiked in December, as they do every year, despite the severity of the penalties. Offenders face the prospect of not just a ban or a fine but a criminal record, and they could have their car taken from them if they are convicted of the most serious offences. It is a mistake that they keep paying for if they lose their job—or their dignity, when they explain to their family what has happened. However, although the figures are stark and the consequences are clear, we still have some way to go if we are to achieve the culture change and the improvements in road safety that we all want to see. We know from experience that it is possible to challenge and change behaviour. Not all that long ago, Scotland had a much more relaxed attitude towards drinking and driving, but things changed and now the vast majority of people quite rightly regard drink-driving as unacceptable. Seat belts are now standard in both front and back seats and although a minority still have not got the message that seat belts save lives, most people have learned to think about their safety when they travel, because of a concentrated effort to educate the public. With this latest consultation, the Parliament has an opportunity to carry that change in attitude through to its logical conclusion. The Republic of Ireland recently aligned itself with other countries in the European Union by reducing its blood alcohol limit for drivers from 80mg per 100ml to 50mg. The devolved Administration in Northern Ireland has made clear its intention to follow, too. The most common limit across Europe, even in countries that have a more mature and responsible relationship with alcohol than we do, is 50mg, so it makes sense fully to explore reducing limits here. Evidence from the North report has been quoted for members in a variety of sources and suggests that where a driver’s blood alcohol content is between 50mg and 80mg per 100ml, they are six times more likely to be involved in a fatal accident. Obviously, the risk of a fatal accident is greater if the concentration of alcohol in a driver’s blood is higher but, whatever the concentration and whoever the driver, the dangers associated with drinking, even in modest quantities, and driving are undeniable. Legislation must reflect the level of danger, so I welcome the consultation and I hope that expert opinion from the BMA, the World Health Organization and our European neighbours will be taken on board. Ultimately, responsibility for enforcing a change in the law will fall to the police. As the Labour amendment makes clear, front-line policing in Scotland is being put under real pressure. The Scottish Government should be clear about how it expects the new police service to find resources to engage with motorists and prevent drink-driving through traffic education programmes. I spoke earlier about the common and recurring campaign over the festive period to target drink-drivers. However, at the moment different police forces support different programmes throughout the year. In September I asked the cabinet secretary a written question about which programmes would be supported by the single police service. He replied that that would be “a matter for the Chief Constable”.—[Official Report, Written Answers, 21 September 2012; S4W-09599.] I accept his answer, but given the importance that his own Government attaches to the issue, I would have hoped for some more clarity.

I will carry on. I ask the cabinet secretary to look at examples of best practice in preventative spending and driver education from Scotland’s existing police forces, with a view to rolling out an effective nationwide initiative when the single police service takes over. I welcome the consultation and I agree with much of what is being proposed. However, in supporting the Labour amendment, I say that we have to do more than change the law to deal with drink-driving. We have to get behind all those who are responsible for changing the drinking culture and all those who enforce our road safety laws in Scotland to keep motorists and the general public safe from harm.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what budget lines will be affected by the transfer of £250 million from DEL resource to DEL capital, as announced in the 2013-14 draft budget. (S4O-01396)

Across the chamber, we all welcome the emphasis on jobs and growth, but excessive cuts to resource budgets increase pressure on public sector employment, and failure to prioritise capital investment properly can dampen growth. It is a hard balancing act for the cabinet secretary. Will he therefore ensure that, in the interests of transparency, parliamentary committees are provided with details of how the £250 million transfer will be implemented? Will he also explain how those funds will help the construction sector, which has been rocked by two recessions and a decline in industry confidence?

First, I pay tribute to our winter heroes, such as the good neighbours who clear the snow in their streets and check on the elderly; the workers on the roads and the transport system who have sometimes dangerous but always vital jobs to do every winter; and the emergency services that serve our communities all year round. Without their efforts Scotland would simply not stay open and safe during periods of extreme weather and challenging weather conditions. I take this opportunity to put on record my appreciation for all of them. For me, today’s focus must be on how our economy, public services and national infrastructure cope with the range of adverse conditions that we can expect to face this winter. Businesses unable to open their doors, staff who cannot get to work and goods stuck on the transport network and not going anywhere all add up, such that it can be make or break for many small businesses. In addition, an extended period of cold weather can leave the elderly and vulnerable isolated and heightens risks associated with ill health by interrupting the provision of key services. A resilient Scotland keeps moving through the winter but, when the weather overwhelms us, as it has on more than one occasion in recent years, the impact can be severe. We cannot control the elements, but we can prepare for them and ensure that every year our response to bad weather is better planned, better informed and better understood.

I agree with that point and I will address it slightly later. It was clear last year that lessons had been learned after the events of the two previous winters. Across government, the business community and the voluntary sector, people are more mindful of the need to invest in appropriate preventative measures. For example, First ScotRail invested in de-icing polytunnels and issued new equipment to station staff in response to the winter of 2010-11, which the company says cost it £7 million; Scotland’s farmers are getting involved in clearing roads to help keep the rural economy moving; and, in my area, South Lanarkshire Council now holds 35,000 tonnes of salt, which is up from 8,000 tonnes just four years ago. The council is also converting some of its existing fleet of vehicles into snowploughs, and last year it purchased 14 Scandinavian gritters. I welcome the improvements in South Lanarkshire but, given the difficult nature of the budget settlement, not every council has been able to develop contingencies to the same extent. However, whatever the service and whoever the provider, everyone has to understand that, although the most severe winter conditions remain uncommon in much of Scotland, particularly in the central belt, they are by no means alien to our climate. As we have learned to our cost, if we are unprepared when heavy snow comes, the country can be brought to a standstill. The strength of our resilience in harsh conditions depends on investment and prevention, but in many ways it also depends on the relationships that the Government can form with crucial strategic partners. In reflecting on last year’s debate on this subject, the minister may recall another example from South Lanarkshire in which the council offered to assist contractors in clearing trunk roads on white Monday in December 2010 but was knocked back—to this day, I cannot understand why. South Lanarkshire Council and the contractors have come to an agreement that should prevent a repeat of that breakdown, but I would be interested to know what the Government is doing to help local authorities share resources with Transport Scotland and contractors as part of a concerted response to the winter disruption. I note from the motion and the minister’s earlier comments that the Red Cross will be partners in resilience week after the success of its campaigning on the issue prior to the previous election. Everyone in the chamber values its contribution and involvement. I also highlight the often understated role of the Met Office, because good preparatory work has to be informed by the best expert advice, and the Met Office is a world leader in its field. We know that its advice assists the Government directly, but it also helps the NHS plan on-going care for patients with long-term conditions through the winter, and it is invaluable to key growth sectors such as the tourism industry and the oil and gas sector. An additional £11 million has been released by the Treasury following pressure from the House of Commons Science and Technology Committee that will boost the predictive capacity of Met Office supercomputers by 20 per cent. I hope that ministers here agree that the Met Office should retain its world-leading position, with the best technology and the best scientific minds, and that Scotland should continue to benefit from access to its forecasts and analyses whatever the constitutional future of the United Kingdom. I will conclude by saying that, although public awareness is crucial, our resilience will come down to more than self-reliance and communication. It takes proportionate preventative steps to keep Scotland moving and open for business whatever the weather, and it takes partnership, too. Councils are the Government’s most valuable partners when a winter crisis hits, and they have to be given the support that they need to get on with the job.

In the space of a week, the Government has gone from defending the process to suspending officials over a blunder that has cost £40 million. Does the Scottish Government agree that the only way to rebuild confidence in the Department for Transport and its tendering process is for there now to be complete and total transparency? Should the UK Government disclose all the relevant documentation, will the transport minister here in Scotland do likewise?

Across the UK, about 40 per cent of those who are unemployed are aged between 16 and 25 and, as we heard earlier this week, the jobs crisis and the worrying trends in our labour market are placing women at a particular disadvantage. Unemployment can affect different people in different ways, but no matter who they are or what they do, it is a waste of human potential and a social tragedy. If we achieve anything as a Parliament in this session, we must bring Scotland back to a position where full employment is once again within our reach. It was reported in the press last week that more than 250,000 people have never had a job at all—a figure that has increased in 26 of Scotland’s 32 councils as the youth unemployment crisis develops. Long-term unemployment is corrosive. It is demoralising and demeaning to the individual, damaging to society and, as the Institute for Public Policy Research said earlier this year, a “hidden crisis”—the real cost of this country’s slowest ever economic recovery. Those who have become newly unemployed since the crisis began in 2008 and those young people who are entering the toughest labour market in a generation must not be lost to long-term unemployment, which is running at a 16-year high. It is wrong to say that there are no opportunities at all in the economy. Over the summer I worked with Jobcentre Plus to organise a jobs fayre in my region and we did our best to match up people who were looking for work with employers who were actively recruiting for new vacancies. However, in some parts of Scotland there are more than 20 people chasing every job. In what the media have termed “employment black spots” there can be as many as 35 people chasing every job. The challenge for government at every level is to provide real opportunities now—not just opportunities to work, but opportunities to learn and to train, in order to help our people to upskill until the upturn comes. We have to strengthen and accelerate the recovery too, with plans and strategies in place to ensure that growth is sustainable and rich with jobs. The Scottish Government must promote, support and improve employability across the board as well as in key sectors such as construction and hospitality. I welcome the commitment to retain college places, but scratch beneath the surface and the further education sector is struggling with budget cuts, job losses and growing waiting lists for college courses. Scotland’s colleges say that 30 per cent of FE students come from the most deprived areas, rising to 70 per cent in the hardest hit parts of the country. Almost 23 per cent of the student population in Scottish universities are from the 40 per cent most deprived neighbourhoods. That figure is not good enough, but it is higher than the number of people from the lowest income deciles at schools who obtain five highers and it shows that for many young people, college is a route into university. I underline the importance of colleges, but the employability infrastructure in Scotland is much wider. I worked with modern apprentices before being elected to this Parliament and it was a very rewarding career. I could see first hand how an apprenticeship could make a difference and I will always be a big supporter of the modern apprenticeships programme.

We need to look at the 25,000 modern apprenticeships that are being offered just now. Are they new this year or are modern apprentices who were recruited last year being carried forward and included in that figure? We need to look into that. I am also of the view that there are gaps in the programme and the youth employment strategy. There are young people who are not ready for a modern apprenticeship but are closer to the labour market than the get ready for work group. In the past, those young people could be supported through the skillseekers programme, but these days I have to question whether enough is being done for them. We must also look at the sectors in which we expect employers to provide modern apprenticeships. The majority of businesses in Scotland are small businesses with fewer than 10 employees, and they host many of our modern apprentices. The Government must do everything that it can to support those businesses as the economy comes through its second recession in four years. In evidence to the Finance Committee, both the FSB and Minerva People Ltd, which is an independent training provider that is based in the south of Scotland, indicated that a single brokerage service would be helpful. I know that the minister addressed the point earlier, but I have another question to ask her. The FSB and Minerva People called for a one-stop shop where information about recruitment incentives, job placements and apprenticeships could be found. When will the single portal that the minister mentioned come on stream and how will it help SMEs to navigate the system with clarity and with confidence?

We must do all that we can to help young people to gain and retain employment. Today, I have set out some ideas on how we can improve our response. We must also keep the economy at the top of the agenda, because in these troubled times a stable economy, a strong recovery and full employment are things that we must fight for and invest in.

Organisations in Glasgow—and, I am sure, throughout the country—will train bus drivers for the public service vehicle licence. If individuals get that qualification, they are guaranteed a full-time job.

The much-needed investment in Monklands hospital will be welcomed across the chamber but what plans are or have been in place to renovate the towers, which are in an extremely poor condition? Are they covered in the plans that the cabinet secretary mentioned?

Two weeks ago, the cabinet secretary suggested that the rise in the longest waits in accident and emergency were simply due to circumstances in particular hospitals. I will ask him about the situation at one of those hospitals. Why does he seem so sure that the persistence of a 12-hour wait at Hairmyres has nothing to do with the staffing situation in NHS Lanarkshire that the previous health secretary left unresolved?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what the reason is for the reported rise in the number of people arriving at accident and emergency units who were not admitted, discharged or transferred within eight hours. (S4O-01270)

I welcome the cabinet secretary to his new post. There is no doubt that, across the chamber, we are all right behind the front-line staff in our A and E units, but we must ensure that the system is geared towards supporting those staff, even when it is under pressure. What impact does the Scottish Government believe that its decisions to cancel minor injuries units and to let nursing jobs go from the national health service throughout Scotland are having on the front line? What steps are being taken to control the number of patients who are experiencing the longest waits at A and E units, which doubled under the previous health secretary?

With the draft budget expected shortly, this is a timely opportunity to consider the Government’s economic strategy and to reflect on how the actions of the Government can support growth in a challenging and changing economy. Yesterday, we learned that the French economy had undergone a contraction of 0.8 per cent, and we heard about the real concerns over the spread of the sovereign debt crisis and a growing recession. Growth in the Republic of Ireland and in Spain has been downgraded, and figures from the second quarter of this year show that the recession in Italy is deeper than was first feared. The euro zone is one of our biggest export markets, but it is still in a state of crisis and a solution seems a long way off. It is sensible for Scottish exporters to look to emerging markets such as the BRIC nations—Brazil, Russia, India and China—for new opportunities, yet even in those parts of the world there are signs of a slow-down. Growth in China, for example, is coming down while inflation is going up. The global financial crisis is now a global confidence crisis. However, it is not all about confidence in the capacity of countries to reduce their deficit, although that is important; it is about consumer confidence, business confidence and confidence in an economy’s capacity to grow. National Governments can respond by pursuing policies that boost aggregate demand, and they can boost it further by acting together with a co-ordinated response and capital investment. Neither Europe nor the United Kingdom has been served well by the prevailing economics of austerity, and Scotland has not been immune from the slump. The finance secretary was quoted in the press yesterday as saying that Scotland has experienced 20 consecutive months of private sector growth. However, the Bank of Scotland also tells us that private sector growth is slowing to a 20-month low and that, overall, the economy has re-entered a technical recession. The problem is that austerity does more than just take money out of the public sector, although that is a problem in itself; the problem is that austerity takes money out of the whole economy. I agree with much of what the finance secretary has said about the coalition Government’s spending review—after all, it is basically a repetition of what the Opposition in the House of Commons has been saying for years. However, I maintain that we should be doing much more with the powers that are available to us to promote growth and create opportunities.

If Jamie Hepburn will let me continue, I will probably cover his question in a minute.

I think that I will. In supporting the Labour amendment, I will make some suggestions. Capital investment is key to the recovery, particularly investment to support our struggling construction sector. However, we must look at new ways of getting the maximum value from tight budgets, not least through the promotion of social responsibility and reform of procurement. Last year, the Department for Work and Pensions introduced a new standard contract that encouraged its suppliers to ensure that five per cent of their total workforce were hired as apprentices, and there are calls for the practice to be rolled out across Whitehall. What plans does the Scottish Government have to introduce similar contracts here in Scotland? Will it wait to pass the procurement reform bill first? The Scottish Government should clarify exactly how its procurement bill will secure apprenticeships and training opportunities and help to prevent another generation from being lost to long-term unemployment. It is not clear whether suppliers will be required to consider providing apprenticeships through community benefit clauses or whether they will be given specific binding targets, as the First Minister seemed to suggest last week. We need to know more about what the Government can do now, and what the bill will allow it to do in future. Finally, what is the Scottish Government doing to make the process of valuation for non-domestic rates more transparent and effective? Local valuation boards are under huge pressure, but their staff and resources are limited. Their caseloads have increased substantially since the recession, and there has been a spike in the number of appeals that are being lodged. Too many of our small businesses in Scotland are faced with long—even excessive—waits for a decision. One business in South Lanarkshire was initially told that an appeal hearing for its property would take place in December 2011, only to have the hearing delayed until February and then March, before it was told that the hearing was unlikely to be held until the end of the summer. I know that appeals can take time, but, given the extra pressures on assessors and businesses due to an economic situation that is entirely outwith their control, I hope that the Scottish Government can review the process as a matter of urgency. It is not clear what the future holds for the world economy, let alone for Scotland’s economy, but we know the consequences of austerity and inaction. The Government has this week reported on its economic strategy, but the real test of its priorities will come when it presents its draft budget and has to demonstrate to a sceptical public that it can turn its words into actions.

As members return to the Scottish Parliament this week, the referendum bill might be topical but the economy must be foremost in our minds. In introducing the draft budget last year, the Scottish Government promised to squeeze every penny out of every pound and to link its spending decisions back to its core objective of sustainable economic growth. However, a succession of experts came before the Finance Committee to argue that the Government was not doing enough to explain how its spending decisions would contribute towards those strategic objectives. The committee’s budget adviser suggested that the Government could do more to explain how the draft budget would support Government policy such as the economic strategy. There is no shortage of evidence highlighting the stimulus effects of capital investment in our economy, and there is no shortage of demands on capital budgets. In an economy in which business is reluctant to invest, Government intervention can make a big difference, but we must explore new ways of financing capital budgets given the austerity measures that are being imposed. Maintaining Scotland’s water and sewerage network is a capital-intensive business, so Scottish Water as an organisation is always capital hungry. It stands to reason, therefore, that we should look for new ways of generating income for Scottish Water as part of the hydro nation agenda. However, I notice that there was no mention of the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill in the First Minister’s speech today. I welcome the announcement that there will be another transfer from the resource budget to the capital budget over the next three years. That has long been supported by Scottish Labour and is a welcome capital injection into the Scottish economy. Nevertheless, I press the Scottish Government for more details on where that investment is to be directed. There is a difference between a project getting listed in the infrastructure investment plan and its being shovel ready. There are other ways in which we can stimulate activity in the economy if we are prepared to innovate. I acknowledge the on-going consultation process on the draft procurement reform bill, and I encourage the business community to respond to the document. In particular, I hope that it will have its say on part 2, which deals with small to medium-sized enterprises and start-ups. Too often, SMEs are at a disadvantage because they can be outbid by big businesses that cream off the best bits of a contract and sub-contract the leftovers. It is clear to me that for those businesses—indeed, for all businesses—the public procurement process must be more accessible and transparent. Only a few days ago, Mike Levack of the Scottish Building Federation described procurement for construction as “a lottery”. For some time, the Federation of Small Businesses has argued that the aggregation of projects into big contracts can put public work out of the reach of SMEs. I have been working with the SBF, the FSB and business gateways in Lanarkshire to look at a model for bringing micro-businesses into consortia at the local level to help them to bid for contracts or sub-contracting opportunities. It is important that we identify and share best practices for small businesses, but if we want real and lasting change in procurement we need new legislation. Of course, the bill is an opportunity to do more than just reform public procurement. It is our chance to use the purchasing power of the Scottish public sector to drive change in the economy and promote employment, apprenticeships and skills; yet, I am disappointed with the language in that part of the consultation. It is a paper full of suggestions that companies should be “asked”, “encouraged” or “required to consider” all kinds of action, but there are no concrete measures. For months, the cabinet secretary said that he was seeking advice from the EU on what he could legally ask of suppliers while we all waited in anticipation. If the suggestions in the consultation are as good as it gets for the procurement reform bill, we need to test the advice that he has received and we need to have a much broader debate about how we make the purchasing power of the Government really work for the people of Scotland. As we have heard today, the coming months are likely to be dominated by the referendum debate. Although I look forward to participating in that debate, we must not lose sight of the economy, given the scale of what is now our second recession in four years.

In his statement, the minister said that rail fares will be attractive and affordable and that he intends to expand regulation to protect some passengers from fare increases. How far will that regulation go, and what steps will be taken to protect passengers who are on low and fixed incomes?

From the Falkirk wheel to Lanarkshire’s great country parks, there is a wide range of premier visitor attractions in my Central Scotland region, which I am only too happy to highlight. With the summer recess approaching, I hope that other members will recognise those attractions too. However, today’s debate is about the visitor economy and the steps that we can take to grow tourism now and in the years ahead, with Labour restating the target of growing tourism in Scotland by 50 per cent by 2016. Scotland is a great place to visit and to do business; the rise in revenue from overnight visits at a time of difficulty in the world economy is testament to that fact. Members all round the chamber share a desire to build on the successes, to develop the visitors’ welcome to Scotland and to secure our status as a world-class destination. The World Economic Forum maintains a travel and tourism competitiveness index that examines different parts of the economy in three broad subject areas: the regulatory framework; infrastructure and the business environment; and resources including natural, cultural and human resources. I will address those three broad areas today, starting with regulation. When we talk about regulation, we often talk about the pressures on industry, and we forget that more elemental types of regulation can be taken for granted. For example, visitors to Scotland can expect high standards of cleanliness and hygiene, with safeguards in place to protect public health and the environment. They can be confident that all staff who handle food will have a minimum Royal Environmental Health Institute of Scotland food-handler certificate and that all licensed premises employ a trained personal-license holder. If people travel from elsewhere in the European Union, they can apply for a European health insurance card, and people can also expect the authorities to take measures to prevent low-level crime in our public places. The simple truth is that the high standards that we can provide in Scotland, backed by a regime of regulation and inspection, are not replicated in every part of the world, and so we have to maintain the good standards that we have set. The second part of the part of the WEF index relates to infrastructure and the business environment. Tourism infrastructure in Scotland is well developed; we have a wealth of visitor attractions that are backed up with brown signage, local tourism partnerships and information offices. We also have a dedicated Government agency that is committed to tourism, thereby reinforcing the broader growth agenda that is set out in the Scottish Government’s economic strategy. There is widespread access to ATMs and our broadband network is being improved and expanded—although many of us would like much more progress to be made throughout more of the country. However, I am concerned that our transport infrastructure is falling behind, and that our road and rail networks do not match those of our near neighbours and competitors. I welcome the investment in Central Scotland’s motorways, which will improve the M8, M73 and M74, but I ask the Scottish Government to be much clearer about the timetable for completion of those works. I agree with the Scottish Government that there should be a capital injection into the economy to support the recovery. However, if it was not for the decisions that were made in the previous session of Parliament about capital spending, we would today be investing in airport rail links in Glasgow and Edinburgh.

No. I am tight for time. I am sorry. I will cover that point next. The performance of our ground and air transport is vital to our competitiveness as a destination, and we must ensure that there are excellent connections between our major cities and airports. The WEF index also assesses a country’s natural, cultural and human resources. There is no doubt about Scotland’s natural beauty and our rich culture. However, I stress the importance of our human resources—our people and their skills. The tourism and hospitality sector requires significant investment in skills and training, which must be more widely reflected in the pay, conditions and status of staff. In the current economic climate, the Government has geared the 25,000 modern apprenticeships that are contracted each year through Skills Development Scotland towards young people. However, the Government has said that it will continue to support adult apprenticeships in key sectors, and although tourism is a key sector, there is no funding for apprenticeships in tourism or hospitality for the 25-plus age group. We must strengthen the welcome that visitors receive, not just from those who operate attractions or who work in the hospitality industry but in taxis, on trains, in shops and around the country, because we all have a duty to promote Scotland and all that it can offer. We are in an extremely good position relative to other countries in Europe and further afield, but we are not yet in as strong a position as many of us would like to be. That will take sustained investment in Scotland’s infrastructure and a concerted effort to turn a warm Scottish welcome into a start-to-finish unforgettable experience for all who visit the country.

As someone with 25 years of experience working in training, I appreciate the chance to speak in this debate. Members on all sides can agree that there is no more pressing issue facing Scotland than the position of our young people in this challenging and changing economy. In every part of my region there are above-average levels of youth unemployment, and news continues to emerge of yet more redundancies at major employers, with Phillips announcing job losses in Hamilton this week. The fundamental problem in our economy is a lack of aggregate demand, which is worsened by a self-defeating deficit-reduction strategy. The Chancellor’s fiscal policies are sapping not just consumer confidence, but investor confidence and the UK economy is being pushed back into recession. As we all know, recession and contraction in the economy puts young people in a vulnerable position. Before addressing what the Scottish Government can do in response, I will briefly refer to what can be done by others, such as employers, volunteers and even members of the Scottish Parliament. You do not need to be the Minister for Youth Employment to make a difference. For example, last week in South Lanarkshire I hosted a jobs fair in partnership with Jobcentre Plus. It was telling that some exhibitors were so overwhelmed with inquiries that they ran out of application forms and had to photocopy new ones. They all commented on the calibre of the jobseekers, many of whom had qualifications or had previously been in good jobs. I also convened a number of very successful meetings between Skills Development Scotland and ScotRail at which we discussed what more local employers could do to help. As a result of those meetings, ScotRail entered into a partnership with South Lanarkshire College and won a contract from SDS to deliver a bespoke course for young people in my region through the college learning programme. Those young people will receive 192 hours of teaching and 190 hours of practical work experience, combining a course with relevant and worthwhile work-based learning. I reiterate that as members of the Scottish Parliament we can make a difference, and we must. We can make a legitimate input into finding solutions in Scotland’s struggle with unemployment. Since every member has a part to play, every member should at least be invited to the regional action forums on youth employment that are taking place across the country. As a member representing Central Scotland, I was disappointed to learn that none of Lanarkshire’s regional MSPs was invited to the action forum meeting that took place last month.

I thank the minister for that statement. I will certainly be there when other such events take place. There has been much debate about the Scottish Government’s commitment to modern apprenticeships. However, I make it clear as someone with a lifetime of experience in training that I have the highest regard for the modern apprenticeship programme in Scotland. I know that everyone across the chamber shares that sentiment. No one here today would criticise the integrity of the modern apprenticeships or the achievement of the apprentices. It is wrong for any member or any minister to suggest otherwise. While no one doubts the quality of the programme and the benefits that it can bring to individuals and employers, I urge the Scottish Government to look again at the bigger picture in its youth employment strategy. My party’s central ambition for the economy is full employment. That means more jobs now and in the future, and investment in our young people’s skills so that they are far better placed to take advantage of the upturn when the recovery comes. We know from Scottish Government data on destinations for school leavers that, although the number of school leavers who are going into higher and further education has increased, the number who are going into training has shown little change and the number who are going into employment is in serious decline. Training programmes are crucial if we are to capture young people who are furthest from the labour market, boost their employability and put them on the path to real work. Scotland’s youth employment strategy must make it clear how training programmes—in their entirety—support a strategic skills pipeline that is sensitive to the needs of different sectors and localities. The Government must be forthcoming with that information if the Parliament is to have the confidence that it is making best use of the welcome but limited European social fund priority 5 funding. The Scottish Government must also be more forthright about its intentions regarding procurement. Today’s strategy again refers to public procurement and the use of community benefit clauses in securing employment for young people, and it restates the Scottish Government’s commitment to a sustainable procurement bill. However, the test of that commitment will be its actions, and not its words. I appeal to the minister to ensure that a comprehensive bill on procurement is introduced as soon as possible. We cannot accept excuses or any more delays.

In a challenging and changing economy, we need the Scottish Government to make good on its promise of an all-Scotland response to youth employment.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive in what sectors Skills Development Scotland will continue to support adult apprenticeships. (S4O-01074)

Skills Development Scotland says that it will fund individuals who are 25 or older in key sectors, but funding for adult apprenticeships in tourism—a key growth sector—has been withdrawn and the funding for 25-plus modern apprenticeships in approved occupational areas is ridiculously low, making it uneconomical for organisations to deliver those qualifications to the approved 25-plus group. Will the Scottish Government act to address those obvious inconsistencies in the way that it allocates and funds apprenticeships for those aged 25 and over?

This is a timely debate on a serious issue that could have profound ramifications for the Scottish economy, regardless of whether we continue in the union or continue to use the pound. It is not certain where the sovereign debt crisis will lead next, but the situation that is developing in Spain provides an unsettling backdrop to today’s debate. We need to tackle the debt crisis, but we must first address the international crisis of confidence not in our ability to bring down the deficit, but in our capacity to grow the economy, to secure jobs and to create new opportunities once again. Greek debt is mainly owed to banks in other European countries—particularly in France, but also in Germany and, to a lesser extent, in Italy, Spain and the UK. However, we also know that banks in the major EU states hold significant debts from other at-risk economies—not least from our near neighbours, Ireland and Portugal. We know that, in turn, Portugal’s biggest creditor is Spain and that Spanish banks owe billions of pounds to banks in France, Germany and the United Kingdom. Although the distribution of European debt is far from straightforward, it is nevertheless extremely important that we understand how the economies of Europe, whether or not they are in the euro zone, are connected. We must be prepared for the prospect of a sovereign default by Greece and we must be aware that Greece could seek devaluation by leaving the euro. Many parts of Greek society would like to keep the single currency, but others think that exit from it is preferable to internal devaluation in an economy that has already experienced five years of recession. However, Greece’s exit from the euro would hit the currency union as a whole, and it is not in the interests of Scottish firms or workers for there to be any further upheaval in the EU, which is our biggest export destination. The ideal scenario for everyone is for the euro zone and the European Central Bank to look beyond the domestic political pressures of member states and to agree to a comprehensive bail-out and to an exceptional but vital debt write-down. Failure to get to grips with what is happening in one country will have consequences for others, because the dominoes of debt will fall and it is not clear where they will stop. Could the minister therefore tell us what precisely is the exposure of Scottish banks to the debts of at-risk European economies? What assurances have ministers sought about the stress testing of banks, given the continuing importance of the financial services sector to Scotland? What is happening in the euro zone has arisen from the continuing fallout of the global financial crisis. It is disappointing to hear members of Parliament—and even members of the Government—parroting the myth that what happened in the global economy happened because Gordon Brown spent too much money. I do not accept that we had too many teachers or too many nurses, or that tax credits were too generous before the crash. Our deficit came from our response to the financial crisis: it was not the cause. Our deficit is not getting in the way of recovery; chronic lack of confidence and aggregate demand are holding us back and hurting our prospects for growth. We have to restore our public finances to good health—as do heavily indebted countries such as Greece—but it is wrong and even economically illiterate to suggest that our economies were ever in the danger zone together. Greek debts are more immediate and come with a higher interest rate than UK debts. Greece is not somewhere that investors want to bank but, despite everything that has happened in the world, the UK still is. If we are going to secure recovery now, we must reject the austerity economics that have done nothing for crisis-hit countries in Europe, and we must realise that growing economies can deal with debt much more easily than can contracting economies. We need a plan for growth, not just for Scotland or the UK, but for the world as a whole. No such plan currently exists, which is why I regard the recent meetings of the G8 and the meetings of the EU finance ministers as being huge missed opportunities. It is clear that there must be a capital injection into the UK economy, and the IMF has called for some measure of fiscal stimulus through targeted tax cuts. I have already said that I support a lower rate of VAT to boost consumer confidence, and incentives to boost the construction industry. However, I urge world leaders to go much further, with a renewed push for growth by stimulating demand, investing in infrastructure and unlocking the potential of new industries. Given how integrated the world banking system has become, we can never be truly insulated against a crisis of this kind. The lesson of the financial crisis is that global problems require global solutions. I call on Parliament and the Government to rise above the myths and the politics that add nothing to the debate, and instead to focus on securing the kind of growth that has so far eluded too many countries in Europe, including our own.

I join the consensus about the importance of languages in the education of our young people and in helping Scotland to realise our potential as a nation. The report by the languages working group opens with a single powerful statement. It says simply that “Language learning is life enhancing.” I associate myself with that accurate sentiment. From French to Spanish and from Cantonese to Urdu, Gaelic or even British Sign Language, learning another language allows our children and young people to develop their cognitive and interpersonal skills. It also enhances their understanding of the world that is around them. Being able to communicate across borders and cultures is a special ability and is a skill that opens up a range of new possibilities and economic opportunities. Young people who become increasingly multilingual through their school education will be far better able to work, learn and trade internationally in later life, so their language skills will be of value not just to them but to Scotland as a whole. Across the chamber, we all share an aspiration to ensure that Scotland is always open and inclusive and that, in every community, people from all backgrounds and all walks of life are made welcome. We are a diverse society. If we want to bring together that diverse society so that different communities can relate to one another and so that we can promote social participation, we must address language barriers. The appropriate language skills must exist in our public services to ensure that those in society for whom English is not a first language can confidently access the national health service, the education system and local services. For example, I know from speaking to Lanarkshire carers centre that, in sections of the black and minority ethnic community, blood-borne viruses are a particular concern. Raising awareness requires a big investment of time and effort in education and outreach work. I cannot help but feel that the job of the people involved would be easier if more people in the communities that they target felt comfortable about approaching the NHS or advice services. The working group’s report recognises that today’s Scotland is a multicultural and multilingual society, so let us reflect on the full range of the diversity in Scotland. In Scottish schools, 138 languages are spoken. English is of course by far the most common home language; it is followed by Polish, Punjabi, Urdu, Arabic, Cantonese, French and then Gaelic, Bengali, German and Spanish. Changing the way in which we introduce children to languages and teaching a second additional language from the later stages of a child’s primary education gives schools the scope to do more than just teach young people about engaging with the world beyond Scotland. It also creates opportunities to teach young people more about the country in which they live. I ask the Scottish Government to reflect on those points as it decides how to prioritise the languages that our children are taught. There should be more awareness of languages that are already spoken in today’s Scotland and better teaching of English as a second language for those who have a different home language. Of course, the comprehensive teaching of languages is of great value not only to the individual but to the economy. Our failure to keep up with the rest of Europe means that Scotland is losing out as some international investors are taking their jobs and contracts elsewhere. Members are aware of reports that the decline in language learning is costing the Scottish economy an average of £500 million per year—evidence from the Confederation of British Industry Scotland and Scottish Enterprise backs up that claim. Schools will have to make a choice about the languages that they teach. It is sensible to build on the good work that is done in teaching the main European languages, but we must also look further afield, so that future graduates can communicate and perform in the changing world economy. There is broad agreement that a strong and sustainable recovery in Scotland will have to be export led and that we will have to gear our economy towards the BRIC nations. The working group is aware of the case for teaching Portuguese, Arabic, Russian and other eastern European languages, but the point is not developed, so it is unclear to me how schools will decide which languages to teach as a priority. I will talk about implementation, in the context of the Labour amendment in Neil Findlay’s name. The introduction of languages, particularly at an earlier age, requires planning and resources, which are currently scarce. I draw members’ attention to the words of Dr Dan Tierney, from the University of Strathclyde, in The Herald. He said: “The targets are welcome, but extremely ambitious and will be very difficult to achieve. To achieve coherence from P1 through to secondary will require better planning in terms of teaching and learning and teacher supply.” The working group has proposed a major shift in how our schools teach languages. If its recommendations are to be implemented successfully, the minister will have to address as an urgent priority the lack of trained teachers and foreign language assistants. I agree that there is a strong and compelling case for change, but if we are to have confidence in the Scottish Government’s commitment to languages, we need clarity about how language teaching will be prioritised and resourced.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the report on the future of public library services by the Carnegie UK Trust. (S4O-01054)

Does the cabinet secretary accept that libraries have a great deal of potential for the future and that many libraries are underdeveloped community resources? Will she look at how libraries can promote social cohesion, given the success of the library-based clubs and courses in parenting and nutrition that are offered to some of the most excluded of my constituents in South Lanarkshire through South Lanarkshire Leisure and Culture Ltd trust?

When the chancellor set out his budget a year ago, he said that he had “put fuel into the tank of the British economy.”—[Official Report, House of Commons, 23 Mar 2011; Vol 525, c 966.] However, the economy has stalled since then. Unemployment has gone up month by month and the chancellor is borrowing £150 billion more than he planned to do. All the experts tell us that the increased borrowing that was announced in November is a consequence of the chancellor’s failure to create growth and secure jobs. The pressure that his fiscal policy has put on our economy and our society also puts a strain on our people. We need a budget that stimulates demand, restores confidence and—this is crucial—creates jobs. I will focus on jobs and employment. When I made my maiden speech last year, I said that if we are to accomplish anything during this parliamentary session, we must give hope and opportunity to all people who are experiencing unemployment. I know from my work in Central Scotland and from my previous career as a training consultant that there are initiatives out there to help people to find jobs and training. Some initiatives are successful—at least, they are as successful as they can be given their limited resources or geographical coverage—such as Routes to Work South in Lanarkshire. Others could be more successful if they were better resourced through job subsidies and employer incentives. However, since May, I have been unable to find a single Government initiative that matches the scale of the unemployment problem—not the work programme, not the community jobs Scotland programme and not even the draft youth employment strategy. The claimant count in my region is not coming down but going up. In my area, more businesses are closing down than are opening, and levels of poverty, which were falling for much of the past decade, are increasing. When we look at those trends, we find human stories, which are often lost in the cut and thrust of the budget debate. It is frustrating to hear from organisations such as Scottish Enterprise and Jobcentre Plus that people who are doing everything that can reasonably be expected of them are not getting anywhere. It was reported last week that in some parts of the country 31 Scots are chasing every vacancy. How can jobseekers succeed if the odds are stacked against them like that? What must those jobseekers think of a Government that puts tax cuts for the richest 1 per cent of earners in the country before the prospects of claimants who are struggling to find work and to support a household on a maximum of £67.50 a week? I have worked with all kinds of unemployed people, from graduates to those who are furthest away from the labour market. I will always remember the case of a man in his late 50s who was on one of my training-for-work programmes. He was under immense pressure to find a job and pay the bills, with threats from the bank to foreclose on his mortgage. I was doing everything that I could to help him apply for job vacancies, including cutting out adverts from newspapers for him. However, when I asked him whether he had applied for any of the vacancies, he would say no. Eventually, I found out why: he just could not handle the constant rejection. For too many people, that is the reality of unemployment. That is why Government at all levels must make job creation a priority with a better budget. A better budget would have cut VAT to help hard-pressed families and boost employment in key sectors; a better budget would have used Government buying power to create jobs here in Scotland; and a better budget would have brought back the future jobs fund and helped Scotland get back to work.

There are not many ferry services in my Central Scotland region, but the ferries review has been topical in the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, which is why I am happy to speak in the debate. At the last election, Scottish Labour made a commitment to turn the road equivalent tariff from a pilot into a permanent measure in the Western Isles, and we promised to extend the scheme to the Clyde coast and Argyll. We were also clear about our ambition to bring back a passenger service between Rosyth and Zeebrugge, in order to connect Scotland with Europe. We also reminded people that, under the Labour-led Scottish Executive, older and disabled people became entitled to two free return ferry trips anywhere in Scotland. Let me make it clear: even Glasgow-born central-belt Labour MSPs are committed to good ferry services and reliable infrastructure for coastal and island communities. That is because we need a joined-up transport network across Scotland in order to make every part of our country as accessible possible, if we are to meet the social and economic needs of all our communities. The Labour motion makes it clear that we believe that there are real social and economic benefits to be realised from securing a ferry service between Mallaig and South Uist.

We did not abolish it. If Kenneth Gibson will let me go on, I will explain why we should have that ferry service. A well-serviced daily and direct route would not only reduce journey times between South Uist and the mainland but would help to reinvigorate the local economy. Faster and better connections to the mainland would make it easier for residents to trade, to commute and to access public services. It would bring more visitors to the area, thereby supporting local businesses and giving tourism in the Western Isles a welcome boost. We know from elsewhere that when the economic prospects of island communities improve, they can begin to tackle the problems of depopulation and of retaining and creating wealth locally. Campaigners have also argued that a new ferry route would reduce the cost of transporting goods to the island, which members will know is a pertinent issue at this time because of the 50 per cent increase in fares that will soon come about because the RET is being withdrawn from commercial vehicles. Modern transport, especially in the Highlands and Islands, can be expensive. The rise in oil prices has increased pressure on motorists and hauliers and that pressure is often reflected in the prices that are passed on to consumers. The RET has made it more affordable to do business in and with the Western Isles; all the evidence suggests that withdrawing the RET from commercial vehicles will drive up costs and make investment by businesses in much of the Western Isles uneconomical. The Outer Hebrides transport group offered members of the Scottish Parliament the example of a lorry on the Oban-Lochboisdale-Castlebay route that would face an 80 per cent fare increase under the plans that were originally proposed by the Scottish Government. A shorter route would be more affordable but would still be subject to higher fares. I therefore call on the Scottish Government to reflect on the impact that changes to the RET will have on the islands, and to think again. The case for an affordable and accessible service between Mallaig and South Uist is clear. It would reduce journey times, boost tourism and support the local economy. The very least the minister could do for those communities is commit without further delay to a trial service.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what retailers will be included in its joint conference with the Scottish Retail Consortium that is scheduled to take place later this year. (S4O-00820)

Several weeks ago, I raised concerns about major retail chains because of closures in East Kilbride and Hamilton town centres. There have been some welcome developments since then, with new investment and new shops opening in vacant premises, but the overall picture is not good. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that invitations to any major conferences on the future of retail are extended to East Kilbride shopping centre and South Lanarkshire Council? Will he ensure that he addresses employment and regeneration in South Lanarkshire?

10. To ask the Scottish Executive how it advertises vacancies for modern apprenticeships. (S4O-00798)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that there is no longer a central portal for advertising modern apprenticeship vacancies, as there was in the past? Will he ask Skills Development Scotland to consider including such a portal on the my world of work website, to help prospective apprentices access the opportunities that they need?

As I worked in libraries for many years, I start by putting on record my appreciation for the good work of libraries across Scotland and for the National Library of Scotland. In a previous life, I worked at the Mitchell library, as well as Stirling, Whiteinch and Parkhead libraries. My experience is that, from recreation and learning in the community to academic study and scholarship, libraries provide an invaluable service to the Scottish public. They are a unique place where we can access and enjoy literature and information, regardless of our background, and they are a portal to knowledge, understanding and culture. In that respect, the National Library is no different from any other library but, when we look at the size of its collection and the scale of its work, it quickly becomes clear that it is no ordinary library. The consensus in the chamber and among those who take an interest in the subject is that the National Library of Scotland Act 1925 should be replaced. Since its inception, the National Library has evolved and modernised. Today, it is more than a library or a collection of materials—however significant those materials might be. The library is one of the most respected institutions and one of the greatest resources in the United Kingdom. It has become a world-leading centre for the study of Scotland and the home to events and exhibitions to celebrate Scottish history, writing, language and ingenuity. It has embraced technology and modern communications to improve access to its vast and expanding digital collection. Through the decades, the library has amassed more than 15 million items, as well as 100,000 manuscripts and 2 million maps. It receives 320,000 new items for its collections each year. The library has built and maintained a strong international reputation. Since launching its new online registration system, it has received 10,000 registrations from 100 countries. Its visitor centre has helped to turn the library building into a tourist attraction in the centre of Edinburgh. Given that sustained growth and the on-going changes, it stands to reason that we should take the opportunity as a Parliament to revisit the 1925 act and pass our own legislation to modernise the National Library and secure its future for decades to come. I am happy to support the bill, which clearly defines the library’s purpose and functions and which makes the library’s governance fairer and more accountable. I am also happy to support legislation to widen access to the library. For example, I welcome the digitisation of collections and the promotion of the library’s position in Scottish cultural life—management should always try to promote access to their collection. However, I will—like other members—draw the Parliament’s attention to a number of points from the Education and Culture Committee’s report on the bill. The National Library is one of only six legal deposit libraries across the UK and Ireland. In common with the other legal deposit libraries, it can legally request a copy of any publication for its collection. It has held that right since 1925—long before the rise of the internet and the digital revolution—when publications generally came in a printed format. Libraries are now presented with challenges in how they collate, record and store publications, which are increasingly being produced in new and different formats. They also have to consider the status and importance that they attach to online content. I realise that it is not the Government’s intention to address all those points in one bill and that it intends to prepare the National Library for the future, when technology will surely become more advanced and more sophisticated. We need to know where such changes will leave our legal deposit libraries. I hope that the Scottish and UK Governments can resolve those points soon. Section 8(3) requires the National Library to comply with directions and guidance that the Scottish ministers issue, provided that they do not conflict with the library’s functions and purposes, as set out in an earlier section. Some of the initial concerns about the extent of the ministers’ power of direction appear to have been resolved, but that is still a grey area. I echo some of the concerns, which were expressed in the committee’s report and in the committee’s evidence sessions. Let me be clear: I do not suggest that the cabinet secretary would ever choose to interfere with the day-to-day work of such an institution. However, it is important to seek assurances as part of the bill process that the National Library’s curatorial independence and responsibilities as a charity will be respected. I associate myself with the comments that my Labour colleagues have made. I hope that the cabinet secretary will consider the points that have been raised as the bill progresses through Parliament.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak on the future of tourism in Scotland, given the importance of the sector to the Scottish economy. The future of large and small businesses and of a range of attractions and services in other sectors depends on the resilience and success of Scottish tourism. As a member who represents communities in North Lanarkshire, South Lanarkshire and Falkirk, I am only too happy to remind Parliament of what is on offer in my region. As I have said before, according to VisitScotland, four out of the top five tourist destinations in the Glasgow and Clyde valley area are based in Lanarkshire: Strathclyde, Drumpellier, Calderglen and Chatelherault country parks. The national museum of rural life, which is the home of one of Scotland’s oldest farms, is based in my home town of East Kilbride. Of course, visitors to Central Scotland can see that iconic symbol of modern Scotland, the Falkirk wheel, and experience our woodlands and canals. We have a lot to offer, not just to visitors from abroad but to people from elsewhere in the United Kingdom and Scotland. One consequence of the world’s recent economic turmoil has been the rise of the staycation, which is a lifeline for the tourism industry. However, although that is a welcome development in the short term, our ambition in the long run must be to market Scotland as a world-class international destination. We all have a duty to do that and to go that extra mile. Whether we be flight attendants, bus conductors, taxi drivers or shop workers, we all shape the tourist’s impression of our nation. Every one of our enterprise agencies should be geared towards promoting Scotland. Every one of our local authorities should have a duty to promote economic growth, including tourism and eco-tourism. Every one of us should realise that we have a responsibility to talk up our country to visitors from all over the world. We held a constructive debate recently on the year of creative Scotland. Many members spoke about the importance of skills to the success of tourism, culture and hospitality. We must give visitors the best welcome to Scotland that we can, if we are to project a strong image of the country and secure repeat tourism. That means ensuring that those who deal with tourists have good soft skills and that we develop customer service skills in our visitor attractions and the hospitality industry. There is a responsibility to customer care throughout the service sector, but many of our international competitors have a much more professional approach to services aimed at tourists. We must give those who work in that field in Scotland the status and recognition that they deserve. In our previous debate on this issue, I spoke about the work of Visit Lanarkshire in bringing together the accommodation sector and visitor attractions as part of a collaborative effort to promote Lanarkshire as a tourist destination. The British Hospitality Association has helpfully provided members with a wealth of information, which clearly shows that hospitality enhances growth in tourism and the wider economy. Indeed, the hospitality industry contributes almost £4 billion a year to the Scottish economy in wages and profits, and it directly employs 220,000 workers, large numbers of whom are employed in both North and South Lanarkshire. VisitLanarkshire has been a great success because of the partnerships that it has forged across sectors, which have led to a better, all-round experience for tourists in the area. The Lanarkshire model could be used elsewhere to help attract visitors and retain income derived from tourism in different parts of Scotland. As a key growth industry, tourism is given a great deal of weight in the Scottish Government’s economic strategy, and Scottish Enterprise is one of the agencies tasked with supporting the sector. Scottish Enterprise is committed to ensuring regional equity in economic development, because differences in growth, family incomes and participation between the different regions of Scotland can lead to a drag in economic performance. Periods of low growth and economic instability, such as that being experienced by the country at present, can aggravate those differences. Rural communities tend to experience low levels of productivity and lower wages than those in Scotland as a whole, while Glasgow and the west experience higher unemployment and fewer business start-ups. We can rise to the familiar challenges that we face in each part of the country by promoting innovation and investment, and by using Scottish Enterprise and Highlands and Islands Enterprise to secure growth that is better dispersed, more balanced and, ultimately, sustainable. The growth of tourism in every part of Scotland would reduce inequalities among regions by adding value to the economy in rural communities and Scotland’s cities, and by opening up new possibilities in places such as Lanarkshire and the Forth valley. Finally, I know that members of all parties share a genuine ambition to promote Scotland as a world-class tourist destination. It is in that spirit of consensus and co-operation that I hope the minister will respond to the points raised during this debate.

I preface my comments by making it clear that I understand that the Scottish Government’s economic policy must be developed within the constraints of the block grant. The Chancellor of the Exchequer inevitably must respond to the budget deficit, but he still has a choice with regard to the pace and scale of deficit reduction. The chancellor was warned that cutting too far and too fast would put the recovery at risk, and I fear that that is exactly what is happening in the economy today, with profound ramifications for all the nations and regions in the United Kingdom. In that respect, I agree with the thrust of the motion. However, I would add that, just as the UK Government has a choice, so too does the Scottish Government.

I am taking no interventions, thank you—time is too tight. It is this Parliament’s job to hold the Government to account and to ensure that the choices that it makes are right for the Scottish economy and for the Scottish people. I have already raised with the Scottish Government my concerns about the retail sector. Figures that were released just this week show that footfall is falling further in Scotland than across the UK as a whole. In all sectors, we can see that businesses are reluctant to invest in new staff or in expansion while consumers hold on to their cash and anxieties about the domestic economy and the euro zone persist. Of course, those are just symptoms of the real problems in the economy: a lack of aggregate demand and a serious crisis of confidence. If we track confidence in both the Scottish and UK economies since 2007, we can see that it recovered from the lows that were experienced during the previous recession, only to decline again after the austerity measures that the chancellor introduced. The UK Government’s spending review has done nothing to reassure investors or consumers about the underlying state of the economy. We need a change of course at a UK level, and we need to know that the Government in Scotland is doing all that it can to increase employment and to boost our economic prospects. As the Government motion indicates, there will have to be a strong international dimension to the recovery and I believe that we should set the bar high. We should look to increase exports to emerging markets and aim to double the value of Scottish exports in the next 10 years. We should task SDI with seeking out new opportunities for Scottish businesses in the BRIC nations and beyond. Earlier this week, I heard that HSBC has launched an international SME fund to make £4 billion of credit available to firms that intend to trade internationally. It will help firms in economies where confidence is low to trade with firms in economies where confidence is rising and growth is strong. We must unlock opportunities at home, as well. Big capital projects attract media attention. However, I have met bodies such as the FSB and the Scottish Building Federation to discuss some of the more persistent practical problems that SMEs encounter in the procurement process. Those who administer that process must ensure value for money for the taxpayer, but the Government should expect them also to consider their decisions’ economic impact on employment, growth and innovation in Scotland. The sustainable procurement bill will give the Parliament the opportunity to scrutinise procurement. Given the urgency of the economic situation, I ask the Government to introduce that bill now. I also ask it to look at measures to make the process simpler and more accessible that do not require legislative change. Small firms and microbusinesses do not have dedicated staff or functions to deal with tenders, and the resources that they have are often limited. They would benefit not only from simplified procurement processes but from the disaggregation of big contracts into more achievable tenders and from more advice from services such as business gateway on how to bid for contracts in consortia with other small firms. When contract aggregation is unavoidable, steps should be taken to ensure that enough subcontracting opportunities are available for local firms, which too often miss out. Many of us in the Parliament have spoken at length about the worrying unemployment levels in Scotland—especially the youth unemployment level. When the labour market is tough, many people take the wise decision to return to education or training to maintain and improve their skills until the economy picks up. However, as I have explained, so many firms are under so much pressure that employers are very often struggling with the costs of taking on a trainee or an apprentice. That was far less of a problem under the skillseekers model, which ensured that costs were borne by Skills Development Scotland instead of employers. I suggest that the Scottish Government should look at innovative ways of helping young people to nurture their skills now, so that they can take full advantage of the upturn in the jobs market when it comes. I am happy to agree with the Scottish Government on some of the substantive points in the motion, but I believe that it can and should do much more to get the Scottish economy moving again.

I have said before that employment and education are very close to my heart because of my professional background in those fields. I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests. I listened to the Minister for Youth Employment’s speech with interest. Although there is certainly room for improvement in the strategy, there are areas of agreement. Measures such as guaranteeing the education maintenance allowance, enhancing the work element of the get ready for work programme and delivering more flexible support for 16 to 24-year-olds from disadvantaged groups such as young carers are all welcome. I had hoped, however, that the draft strategy would be more substantial, given the 83 per cent increase in youth unemployment to which the document refers. Experience tells us that, sadly, the longer young people are unemployed, the further away from the labour market they will drift as they lose their confidence and self-esteem, their skills become dated and their talents go to waste. The strategy must prevent the injustice and indignity of unemployment, as well as offering young people a route back into work, with new measures to create new opportunities. Many of those measures are voluntary, such as asking firms to take on staff when they receive Government contracts or encouraging firms to make voluntary opportunities available. Voluntary action is welcome, but it has its limits. My focus today is squarely on Government action that is guaranteed to help. Members on all sides of the chamber will know of cases in which apprenticeships have been interrupted due to redundancies and jobs have been lost while employers, who are still struggling with the costs of the downturn, are left feeling too anxious to take anyone else on. The model that we have in this country for delivering modern apprenticeships ties a placement to a job, but in the current economic climate it is an investment that many employers cannot afford to make. I advise the minister to look at alternatives that might work better in the current economy, such as the skillseekers model, which transfers the risks and responsibilities associated with taking on an apprentice to training providers. Those training providers, with their expertise in the field, could administer training allowances, identify suitable placements and give apprentices one-to-one support within a framework set by SDS, which would relieve the burden on employers. Young people who cannot find work now have to be trained so that they can take advantage of the new opportunities that become available when the economy improves. Many in the training sector doubt that the market has the capacity to deliver that training under the existing model. On the broader issue of how we encourage employers to recruit young people at this time, I ask the Government to look again at job subsidies, and consider again the merits in Scottish Labour’s proposal for a future jobs fund. The introduction of community jobs Scotland is a welcome development, but as it does not extend beyond the voluntary sector—as my party has suggested that it should—small businesses and other employers cannot access the cash. I urge the minister to ensure that the new policies that have been announced since the Government reshuffle—such as the roll-out of activity agreements and the my work coach initiative—complement rather than compete with the life skills and get ready for work programmes. New ideas are welcome, but the minister must ensure that her budget adds value to the schemes and courses that are already in place, instead of diluting the national training programme further. Activity agreements might work for some young people who are completely disengaged and have multiple barriers to work, but they will not work for all and will not work while the quality of the agreements differs from one council area to another, with no overarching framework to ensure fair and consistent high standards throughout Scotland. In some cases, an agreement is found to be honoured if there is only two hours of contact per week between the young person and an adviser, whereas the life skills programme—which is also aimed at some of the hardest-to-reach young people—requires a minimum of 15 hours of contact per week. Does the minister accept that activity agreements should be regarded not as a positive destination, but as a transition towards the life skills and get ready for work programmes? Will she explain how she intends to roll out activity agreements throughout Scotland with a budget of £4 million when the Government allocated a total budget of £12.3 million to the pilots, which covered only 10 of Scotland’s 32 councils? I totally support one-to-one work coaching but we need details about how the my work coach programme will be implemented. Why has SDS been chosen as the vehicle to deliver work coaching? Where will the work coaches be recruited from and how will they be deployed? The Government already supports coaching through the national training programme. I repeat my point that we should listen to training providers and add value to such programmes, because that is a better way of ensuring that Scotland’s young people are job ready.

I, too, am grateful for the opportunity to speak about the year of creative Scotland and the practical importance of Scottish culture. Earlier this week, I read that the Hollywood film industry and numerous other productions for TV and cinema had boosted the Glasgow economy by £20 million in 2011, led by the shooting of the Brad Pitt movie “World War Z” last summer. When I was growing up in the Gorbals, it would have been pure fantasy to imagine Hollywood stars filming in our city, but it is now a reality and, I believe, a sign of things to come for Glasgow and Scotland. The Scottish Government’s economic strategy identifies the creative industries as a key growth sector. Scottish Enterprise has indicated that the sector contributed £5.4 billion to the economy in 2010. In the past decade, the number of businesses that are involved in culture and the creative industries grew by 27 per cent compared with an average growth of just 4 per cent in all other sectors. That is a positive trend that shows how resilient the sector can be. I welcome the drive to make 2012 the year of creative Scotland, which is a chance to showcase our arts, skills and culture to visitors from Scotland and from throughout the world. To do that, we must make the connection between Scottish culture, the creative industries and another key growth sector—Scottish tourism. Tourism accounts for almost 9 per cent of employment in Scotland and is worth £11 billion per annum to the Scottish economy, which is the equivalent of 10 per cent of gross domestic product, so it is an important sector. We have heard a bit about what Scotland can offer, from concerts and festivals to arts and crafts and from the Edinburgh festival to events in Glasgow, which is a UNESCO city of music and a European city of culture. Our museums and galleries welcome 25 million visitors per annum and are worth £800 million to the economy. A quarter of tourists to Scotland choose to visit museums and galleries such as the national museum of rural life in East Kilbride. A growing number of visitors to Scotland come to find locations that are mentioned in film or literature. Rosslyn chapel has become one of the better-known examples, following the success of “The Da Vinci Code”, but there are others, such as the Rebus tours in Edinburgh. As I represent Lanarkshire and Falkirk, I remind members that Scotland’s attractions stretch beyond the areas that are traditionally thought of as tourist hubs or cultural centres. According to VisitScotland, four of the top five tourist attractions in the Glasgow and Clyde valley area are located in Lanarkshire. Top destinations include Lanarkshire’s great country parks of Drumpellier, Calderglen, Chatelherault and Strathclyde, which attracted more than 6.3 million visitors in 2009 alone. The Falkirk wheel, which is also in my region, attracts half a million visitors every year and has quickly become one of Scotland’s most recognised landmarks. Such places are great assets for Scotland and great venues for events and exhibitions, where we can showcase our creativity and promote our cultural tourism, at every level. VisitLanarkshire is involved with local people’s activities as part of this year’s focus. There is the exhibition at the Scottish museum of industrial life at Summerlee, which the previous speaker mentioned, and entries to South Lanarkshire Council’s annual photography competition are on display at Chatelherault in Hamilton—a building that is a testament to the skill and creativity of its architect, William Adam. The Labour amendment stresses the importance of community involvement in this year’s activities, and Lanarkshire is setting a good example. I ask the Scottish Government to consider people’s opportunities to participate and volunteer. For example, there are young people who might have a talent or interest that relates to Scottish culture, older people who have experience and want to stay active and give something back, and young and not-so-young people who are out of work and in need of positive, useful work experience. Throughout society there are people who could benefit from getting involved in this year’s events and the events that follow as we build up to 2014. I am a former training consultant, so I can assure members that good work experience and placements can lead to good jobs. I have talked about the economic benefits of cultural tourism. The creative industries show promise. Tourism has felt the effects of the recession but remains a major industry with huge potential for growth in the years ahead. If we are to keep Scotland competitive and ensure that we become the world-class destination that I know that we can be, we must ensure that the workforce in our cultural attractions and key parts of the service sector is properly skilled. The Government understands the importance of repeat tourism and I hope that it is working on our main cultural attractions to ensure that staff who deal with the public have the skills and the aptitude for customer service that visitors rightly expect. It is not just in museums, galleries and visitor centres that we need those skills; we need to know that proper training is taking place in the hospitality sector, in public transport and in the airports, so that Scotland maintains its reputation as a welcoming place for all who come here. In 2012 we should not just celebrate creativity but actively show creativity in how we promote ourselves as a nation to the rest of Scotland and the rest of the world.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive how it supports the retail sector. (S4O-00574)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the news that d2 Jeans, La Senza and now Peacocks, which owns Bonmarché, are all going into administration? Retail is not one of the Government’s key growth industries, but the sector is a major employer in my region. Nowhere is that more apparent than in East Kilbride, where all those firms have outlets in our shopping centre. What priority does the Government give to retail? When the cabinet secretary has discussions with the retail sector, will he announce them and give me details of them, please?

I welcome the opportunity to speak about education and learning because, as I have said before, subjects around young people, their training and their broader education are very important to me. They were a big part of my professional life before I entered Parliament and I am grateful for the chance to speak about them. I will focus on education as it relates to employment, but before I do so I will comment on the early years. I remind the Scottish Government of its commitment to preventative spending and early intervention, which I am happy to endorse. A proven and increasing body of evidence strongly suggests that predictors of a child’s education and health outcomes are established in the early years. I hope that in 2012 the Scottish Government will translate its promises on access to nursery teachers and childcare into action. I also hope that it will look at the transition from nursery education to primary school and support for parents with children aged nought to three. Parents have a crucial role in their child’s education and that is most apparent in the early years. Reading to very young children, playing with very young children and ensuring that a child’s lifestyle and diet support their development can make a positive difference to their attainment and their life chances in later years. I now turn my attention to the later years. Figures that have been provided to me by Jobcentre Plus in South Lanarkshire show that there has been a severe increase in the number of jobseekers allowance claimants from 2008 onwards. Eighteen to 24-year olds account for more than 30 per cent of that rising number of claimants but account for only 16 per cent of the local population. Scotland’s struggle with youth unemployment is well documented and the problem is particularly acute in areas that I represent in central Scotland, such as South Lanarkshire. When the First Minister announced the appointment of a new Minister for Youth Employment, he said: “No young person should go through school only to become an unemployment statistic at the age of 16. The £30 million announced today will be invested in helping Scotland’s young people into training, work or education”. I welcome every penny of investment that goes towards ensuring better destinations for young people in the formative years after they leave school. It is no future jobs fund, but it is a start. The appointment of a Minister for Youth Employment is a welcome step. I impress upon her the need for Government and its agencies to work with schools and employers to help youngsters to access opportunities. I have spoken to employers who are concerned about the job-ready status of school leavers. It is not necessarily the case that the young people lack qualifications, but often they could benefit from skills-based training and better work experience. Work experience has to be more relevant to the modern workplace. When schools develop placements, they should make much better use of local employers and bodies such as business gateway and Scottish Enterprise. I feel from my experience in training that too many young people are unprepared for the realities of job seeking. We should ensure that young people who are looking for work know how to perform in an interview. For example, they should know how to present themselves and how to research the vacancy beforehand. It is unfortunate that so many young people, especially those who are hardest to reach, do not learn those lessons until after they have been rejected for a post. I repeat to the Scottish Government the suggestion from employers and industry leaders that Skills Development Scotland could be more responsive to the changing needs of school leavers and prospective employers in the changing economic environment. The get ready for work programme for 16 to 19-year-olds is a welcome part of the changing landscape that helps young people, including those who are hard to reach. However, many of those youngsters can be identified and assisted at an early stage, and I ask the Scottish Government to bear that in mind. I hope that the Scottish Government will be forthcoming with the details of the national training programme in its entirety in 2012. The First Minister announced that Skills Development Scotland has fully contracted for 25,000 modern apprenticeship places for this year, but he has not explained how many of those places he expects will be filled by March or how many of them will go to school leavers aged 16 to 19. I remind the Scottish Government of its relatively positive response to Scottish Labour’s literacy commission. In that regard, figures that have been published by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development show that 16 per cent of 15-year-olds in Scotland struggle with reading, compared with just 8 per cent in Finland. The Institute of Directors urged action on that issue in its manifesto for last year’s Scottish Parliament elections, pointing again to the importance of early intervention as a way of preventing problems in later life. We know from the experience of West Dunbartonshire Council that it is possible to tackle illiteracy, and I urge the Scottish Government to take that agenda forward in 2012. The debate has covered a wide range of subjects relating to the entire learner journey, but I hope that the areas that I have drawn attention to will be given the priority that they deserve by the Scottish Government in the year ahead.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this debate on the budget report, after serving on the Finance Committee for the past seven months. That was my first experience of a parliamentary committee, and I found the range of speakers and witnesses whom we have met in recent weeks and months to be genuinely interesting and deeply knowledgeable. Members of the committee and the Parliament know that I do not agree with the report in its entirety, but I think that much of the committee’s work has been extremely valuable, especially the on-going work on preventative spending. The preventative spending agenda is not nearly as new as we might think that it is. There are many other countries in Europe that have mainstreamed prevention and early intervention for some time, and there are many examples of early intervention action in Scotland and the UK. The agenda is not new, but I do not think that it has ever been given this much attention in a budget or by a committee. We must now ensure that the strength of the Scottish Government’s efforts matches the scale of its ambitions. The Government has been asked to provide more information on how preventative spending will be delivered. We need assurances that the £500 million that has been set aside for that purpose will not be used to replace existing expenditure. I hope that the Government is in a position to confirm that those moneys will be used to support genuine preventative measures and real innovation in early intervention. Progress on prevention is welcome, but there are other areas in which we are not seeing very much progress. I have real concerns about the draft budget and the spending review. I do not expect that every one of my colleagues on the Finance Committee will share those concerns, but I hope that they will at least understand the right of Labour members to dissent when we are asked to agree a budget report.

I have a tight six minutes, and in the spirit of Christmas, I am not taking any interventions. For clarity, I would like to explain to members where I feel there are shortcomings in the budget that should have been referenced and reflected in the report. According to guidance on budget scrutiny from the financial issues advisory group that the Parliament adopted in 1999, “Successful scrutiny depends on the quality of the Budget information and access to it.” My colleague on the committee and I do not think that there is enough information in the report to allow successful budget scrutiny. As we said in our own critique of the budget and the report, too much of the document focuses on process rather than incisive analysis of the budget allocations that have been made. There is no in-depth consideration of the implications of spending allocations for the NHS and local government although, together, their budgets account for 67 per cent of spending and 93 per cent of public sector staff. Furthermore, we are concerned that the budget does not convincingly promote economic growth and that important evidence that was brought before the committee and which supports that contention was either not included in the report or not given the weight that it deserves. There has been no shortage of publications from the Scottish Government concerning the economy, with the economic strategy and the infrastructure investment plan being launched just recently. However, we have to ensure that the promised growth and investment are supported by the budget. The committee’s budget adviser, Professor David Bell, has pointed out that questions of that nature were asked last year and growth has continued to disappoint. A fundamental reappraisal of how the budget supports growth is surely long overdue. Professor Jo Armstrong has made the same point and called for more detail on the tangible effects of the budget on growth, and Professor Jeremy Peat has said that there is not enough of a strategic linkage between the budget, the economic strategy and the national performance framework. He went on to say that we need to know more about those links to make it “easier to understand why particular proposals were made without risking the perception that politics were the driver rather than the welfare of Scotland.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 26 October 2011; c 182.] Those are not my words; they are the words of an independent expert who gave evidence to the committee. Three separate experts have come to the same conclusion about the budget. We need more detailed figures, more comprehensive information and more rigorous analysis. There are also issues to do with capital spending. The resource to capital transfer in the budget is less than that last year, but the Government’s made in Scotland private finance initiative or NPD—non-profit-distributing—programme, as it is more commonly known, does not initiate major spending until the next year. There is a gap this year, which gives rise to concerns about the stimulus effect of the budget. I draw members’ attention to pages 5, 6 and 7 of the report, which deal with that very point. Like the rest of the committee, I welcome the Government’s announcement that it will transfer up to £750 million to capital expenditure by 2014-15, but both our budget adviser and the financial scrutiny unit have pointed out that we do not know how that will be implemented. I would go even further than the Finance Committee and ask the cabinet secretary to give a clear indication as to which budget lines that cash will be drawn from. That is a reasonable request; indeed, if I am not mistaken, it was also made by the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee. That is not fully explained in the report. I hope that the Scottish Government will take those points on board and that it will work with members from all parties to deliver a better and more transparent budget, whether we choose to endorse the report or not to do so.

I welcome the opportunity to speak about regulation. I have a business background and so have some experience of red tape and compliance, and several weeks ago, I joined the Scottish Parliament business exchange. I am therefore mindful of the business community’s concerns about the regulatory framework in which it must operate. From dealing with recruitment and selection to health and safety and equal opportunities, businesses must take full account of the rules and regulations that are placed before them. Excessive or uneven regulation can be a headache for small businesses, which is why it is so important that the regulatory review group has a clear and consistent approach to the issue. Most businesses understand the need for proper regulation in the economy, but they also hope and expect that regulators will be sympathetic to their needs and the demands that they have to contend with on a day-to-day basis. Regulators have to remember that small businesses and independent firms do not have dedicated compliance functions, and the Scottish Government has to ensure that the training on compliance through business gateways is advertised and fully promoted. Of course, we all represent a much broader constituency than the business community. Each of us, in our own way, has an understanding of the public interest and an understanding that economic growth is not the sole objective of any Government. We have duties to protect the environment, to preserve our heritage, to achieve equality and to defend the rights of workers, consumers and families across Scotland. There is some recognition in the Government’s motion of those tensions—tensions between growth and other gains—but I would argue that good, proper, effective regulation can help rather than hinder economic growth. There is some recognition of that out there in the Scottish economy and in Scottish society. Overall, the tone of the debate about regulation is much more sedate, dignified and constructive in Scotland than elsewhere in the United Kingdom. When the previous Administration set up the regulatory review group, it tasked the group with the job not of deregulation or reregulation but of better regulation. I am glad that the review group continues to approach the issue in that way. The Scottish Government’s economic strategy prioritises seven key sectors: the creative industries; energy and renewables; financial services; food and drink; life sciences; tourism; and Scotland’s universities. I know that the regulatory review group is independent of Government, but I suggest to the minister that it might be worth while to ask the group to look into those sectors. A timely and measured assessment of the regulation landscape in the creative industries or life sciences would allow us to address barriers to growth. It would also allow us to consider how those sectors can grow and develop in a fair, balanced and sustainable way. We can see from its annual report that a large part of the group’s work has involved monitoring the introduction and implementation of business and regulatory impact assessments. Annex 6 of the report shows that the Scottish Government regards those assessments as mandatory unless a ministerial exemption is granted. Will the minister say how many exemptions have been granted and, in each of those cases, why? How does he differentiate between cases in which the exemption is justified and those cases in which it is not? I turn finally to the issue of procurement. I have spoken at length in other debates about youth unemployment, skills and training, and I believe that, through community benefit clauses, we can use public procurement to regenerate communities and to help young people into work. EU rules on state aid allow the Government to intervene in certain circumstances to help disadvantaged groups, and I regard all the young people in Scotland aged between 16 and 24 who are struggling to find work as being at a disadvantage. Those who have a disability or are part of a minority are often pushed even further from the labour market. I believe that regulation and procurement can and should drive real change in the Scottish economy. For that reason, I encourage members to support the Labour amendment.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what guidance it issues to national health service boards on the provision of X-ray services. (S4O-00455)

The NHS Lanarkshire board reports that X-ray technology in Stonehouse hospital is ageing and is becoming increasingly out of date. However, instead of replacing the technology, it is withdrawing the service from the community entirely and asking patients to travel to Hairmyres hospital in East Kilbride. Many of those who attend Stonehouse hospital live in rural South Lanarkshire, where travel can be difficult in winter and where there are no direct bus or rail services to Hairmyres. Will the Scottish Government therefore intervene to stop the X-ray services from being phased out at Stonehouse hospital?

In evidence to the Finance Committee, the Centre for Public Policy for Regions said of budgets to local government: “future funds are less certain as they rely on NDR, whose final level is dependent on sustained economic activity.” Does the cabinet secretary accept that there is very real concern among experts about the credibility of his figures? If there is a shortfall in resourced budgets, how will he plug the gap?

I do not want to repeat statistics of which the Parliament is already aware, but it is worth bearing it in mind that we learned from the autumn statement that unemployment is to rise to 8.7 per cent next year and still further the year after that. I fear that, the chancellor having cut too far and too fast, the changes that he announced in the statement are too little and too late. Everyone should have a fair chance of getting a good job, and Government at every level should aspire to a full-employment economy and a full-employment society. The Finance Committee has been discussing early intervention and preventative spending. There is an overwhelming body of evidence that proves that having a job is good not only for a young person’s income but for their health, social wellbeing and mental state. We know from studies conducted during the previous period of mass unemployment in the 1990s that people in secure employment are more likely to recover from illness and less likely to be depressed. Depression is more common among young people than among any other group of unemployed persons. We need a jobs strategy that recognises how opportunity and job creation can build not just a healthy economy but a healthy society. In South Lanarkshire, 18 to 24-year-olds make up 16.9 per cent of the working-age population, yet they account for more than 30 per cent of jobseekers allowance claimants. Compared with the rest of Scotland, the number of young people who are out of work in my area is disproportionately high. If the years that I spent working in training and back-to-work education taught me anything about youth unemployment, it is that the only solutions that have been proven to work are those that match the scale of the problem. I intend to talk about interventions on the supply side to help to create opportunities for young people. Before I proceed, I make it clear that the recent climb in the level of youth unemployment is not natural or structural but a consequence of a lack of demand in the economy. Public spending cuts that are any greater than they need to be will not boost demand but will do the opposite and will serve only to prolong the problem. We have heard a lot about the college sector and the role of further education in delivering skills and training, but a large number of private training providers are also doing great work to help young people into employment. I recognise the role of those organisations and of charities such as the East Kilbride & District Engineering Group Training Association, which I have had the pleasure of visiting twice since being elected. Before my election, I was a training consultant and, before that, I worked at the University of Strathclyde, where I was responsible for the training unit and the modern apprenticeship scheme. I was also responsible for recruiting all staff under the age of 20. Youth unemployment and training are issues that are very close to my heart, and they are also ones that I have dealt with on a day-to-day basis in my professional life. We are talking today about the 18-to-24 age group—and rightly so—but, in my experience, some of the barriers to employment or decent work-related training present themselves at an earlier stage. I have always believed that schools could do more to improve work experience, as a wealth of experience in education, training and careers guidance could be brought into the process. We could do more to match the talents and ambitions of young people with good work experience placements that are relevant to the individual’s career choices. We already have national qualifications in work experience at access 3, intermediates 1 and 2 and higher, and I suggest that we could make better use of those qualifications. We could even go as far as to develop new ways of delivering work experience so that 16 and 17-year-old school leavers are more likely to find employment and less likely to become unemployed between the ages of 18 and 24. Although funding is available to help employers to take on apprentices, it is not necessarily enough of an incentive in these difficult economic times. That is also true of other employer incentives. Jobs subsidies have become very popular recently, with even the chancellor committing to a new scheme. The Scottish Government has community jobs Scotland, the UK Government has its new youth contracts and progressive local authorities in Scotland, such as Glasgow City Council and South Lanarkshire Council, have announced their own graduate employment schemes. Those are all welcome measures, but none of them matches the original future jobs fund or the Scottish future jobs fund, which the Labour Party proposed at the most recent election. If members remember nothing else from today’s debate, they should remember this: the future jobs fund worked. That is not just my view; it is the view of the Work and Pensions Committee at Westminster, the Work Foundation and the voluntary sector. I said earlier that our response to youth unemployment must match the scale of the problem. What the UK Government has announced amounts to a jobs subsidy of £2,275 per placement, whereas the future jobs fund provided up to £6,000 per placement. Community jobs Scotland supports 2,000 places in the voluntary sector, whereas the Scottish future jobs fund would have created 10,000 opportunities in all sectors. We must be more ambitious than that. I want to secure a new future jobs fund. If the Parliament will not agree to that, I hope that we can at least agree to extend community jobs Scotland into other sectors with new resources as they become available. The level of youth unemployment has been too high for too long. Addressing that is my number 1 priority, and I hope that it is a priority that is shared by members across the Parliament.

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what discussions have taken place between the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs and the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism regarding the importance of culture to winter tourism. (S4O-00447)

Can the minister confirm that the Government’s museums and galleries strategy helps our cultural attractions to realise their full potential as visitor attractions? Will he ensure that, as far as possible, the museums and galleries are open to visitors in all seasons, as is the excellent national museum of rural life in East Kilbride? I encourage all members to visit that museum, if they have not already done so.

I welcome this opportunity to speak in the debate on the Government’s strategy for carers, especially as carers’ rights day will take place on Friday 2 December. The theme for the day will be money matters, and the purpose of this year’s awareness day is to ensure that carers have all the information that they need to access the benefits and support to which they are rightly entitled. Money matters because carers should not be penalised or denied opportunities to learn, work or develop their own interests as a consequence of their commitment to others. On carers’ rights day, I will be hosting an information fair for carers and their families in Central Scotland, with the kind support of East Kilbride shopping centre. The response and the good will towards the event from constituents in the community, and even online, has been overwhelming and totally positive. Caring can, and should, be a rewarding experience, but it is costly in many ways. According to Carers UK, eight out of 10 carers have become financially worse off since becoming a carer, and long-term carers are, on average, more likely to find themselves living on means-tested benefits. Demands on time and on finances place carers in a difficult position that has only been compounded by rising household bills and anxieties over the job market. Too many carers do not claim the benefits to which they are rightly entitled. Many others do not even think of themselves as carers, and therefore miss out on support that could make a material difference to their lives. Receiving carers allowance can help to protect state pension entitlements, which is a real benefit for those who are unable to work due to their commitments and have therefore been unable to pay national insurance contributions. The allowance is also a gateway to extra entitlements such as the carer premium for income support and jobseekers allowance, and an increased pension credit. Of course, it is not just about benefits: there are plenty of other means of assisting carers, from practical support into employment to aids and adaptations at home, which can be a help for carers as much as for those for whom they are caring. The physical demands of lifting, bathing and dressing someone day after day can affect the health of carers, especially old carers who may be frail themselves. A report by Carers Scotland entitled “Sick, tired and caring: the impact of unpaid caring on health and long term conditions” found that 96 per cent of respondents reported that caring had had a negative impact on their health and wellbeing. Health complaints ranged from exhaustion and back and shoulder pain to anxiety and depression, and many of those who were surveyed reported that they had more than one health condition that was either caused or made worse by their caring. As I indicated, home adaptations are crucial. Carers Scotland has also suggested that training should be made available to carers to help them to stay safe and keep well as they tend to whoever they are caring for. That point is included in chapter 14 of the carers strategy, and I would be interested to hear in the minister’s summing up—further to his earlier remarks—about how plans for the training of carers are progressing. When will the Scottish Government be in a position to offer training to all carers? Will that training include management of the carer’s personal health, as the carers strategy says that it should? Will training be accessible to black and minority ethnic communities and those for whom English is not a first language? Carers Scotland has made a number of other good points, and I commend its report to anyone who seeks greater insight into how the demands of caring can unfortunately affect a carer’s health. The sample that was used was modest, but the experiences of respondents are real and very telling. Members may wish to note that a new report with a much larger sample will be published in the next few days. I will read out an extract from the Carers Scotland report that I think is relevant to the debate, which brings together some of the most significant strands of the issue: finance, health and the need for compassion and support from those in power. It states: “As is well established, poverty and disadvantage are closely linked to poor health outcomes and, amongst carers, recent research identified that many carers face a simple choice between heating and eating with more than 53% reporting cutting back on food and 60% on heating.” Someone’s status as a carer should not be a barrier to secure employment in a decent job or even meaningful education and training. There is much in the Government’s strategy that I am happy to applaud, but we must ensure that warm words translate into action, because too often before that has not happened. There are very few people who choose to be a carer. Some do so but, for most, the responsibility is thrust upon them. Some carers experience hardship and some experience poor health—

—but they are all to be praised for the service that they give and the sacrifices that they make.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive what advice it issued to local authorities regarding non-domestic rates, following the publication of the draft budget. (S4O-00343)

Local authorities are concerned that, several weeks after the publication of the draft budget, they have yet to receive any guarantees that their budgets will be protected should the increased income that the Government assumes will come from non-domestic rates fail to materialise. I also draw the cabinet secretary’s attention to the fact that more local businesses in South Lanarkshire are collapsing than are starting up. Can he give Scotland’s councils a categorical assurance that he will meet any shortfall in non-domestic rates if his figures are found to be less certain than his Government has claimed them to be?

Like other members, I begin by putting on record my thanks and appreciation for the work of our servicemen and women, past and present. We expect a great deal from our armed forces and expect them to put their personal safety and even their lives on the line in the service of others. We expect them to act with exceptional bravery, of a kind many of us have never witnessed and can only imagine, and expect professionalism from our services in even the most adverse conditions. I am proud of our armed forces, not just because they meet our high expectations, but because they so often exceed them. We have every reason to be proud of our armed forces and we should never be ashamed to celebrate their selflessness or their service. Thousands upon thousands have served in our military through the years in a range of operations in times of war and in reconstruction and peacekeeping, too. It is only fitting that their contribution is recognised by the state and by the people. That is why I am so pleased with the uptake of the HM armed forces veteran lapel badge since 2004. I am also delighted to speak in the debate, because my grandfather, like Jamie Hepburn’s, was in the Seaforth Highlanders and my father was a Bevan boy in world war two. I add my voice to those calling for a Ministry of Defence hospital unit in Scotland. The benefits of a new unit in Scotland have already been outlined in the debate and I think that the case for it has been made very well. I remind members that all existing MOD hospital units are located in England, so there is a real strain on veterans, who are treated some distance from their home, and on their families, who have to travel to be with their loved ones. I hope that as a result of this debate the Scottish Government will look into whether we have the capacity in the national health service in Scotland to support a new Ministry of Defence hospital unit here. If we have the capacity, I hope that local health boards will prepare a case for a hospital unit in their areas and take the matter up with the UK Government. There is no reason why we could not have a Ministry of Defence hospital unit in Scotland within the next few years. I encourage the Scottish Government to join with the Royal British Legion and the veterans’ community in attempting to secure such a new facility. Every party went into the last election promising to do more to join up services from healthcare and social work to education and welfare. It is a common topic in Finance Committee round tables and in Scottish Government publications and it is an agenda that we must take forward if we are to improve public services and outcomes for the service users. Where veterans are concerned, especially those who have been injured in service, we must ensure that public services in Scotland are joined up with the Ministry of Defence and the armed forces in order to ensure a good, consistent and uninterrupted level of service. War can have a profound physical and psychological impact on our servicemen and women and sometimes the symptoms of a health problem or mental health issue can be difficult to detect, or might not materialise for several years. The Finance Committee has done a significant amount of work on preventative spending. If we were to apply the logic of early intervention to veterans’ affairs, we would develop better means of support for the transition from the services to civilian life. That would help prevent some of the health and social problems that face our veterans. As I have learned, many of the quality-of-life issues and issues around integration into the community that veterans face can be addressed through practical interventions at that vital transitional stage. Work is already being done in service. The Ministry of Defence and its partners have said publicly that they aim to work with troops while they are still serving and gradually help them readjust to civilian life. However, I have heard that just 60 per cent of those leaving the armed forces access resettlement support. That means that 40 per cent, who could be leaving for reasons ranging from natural progression to a medical discharge, do not access the help that is available to them. I hope that there are lines of communication between the UK Government, the Scottish Government and the very sizeable voluntary sector in this field to ensure that veterans throughout the UK can find support to gain employment, find a home or access health and social work services.

I certainly do. However, we must continue to look at how we might provide further help to veterans. After all, continuing care and a consistent level of service are important for not only servicemen and women but their families. We will all agree that this debate has provided an opportunity to discuss in a useful and poignant way the needs of an extraordinary group of people. Before we vote on the motion, I simply want to impress upon the Government the practical needs of veterans and their families.

Follow that if you can, eh, Margaret? The events of last winter and the dreadful conditions that we experienced have been etched in the memory of everyone here. Every year we have come to expect a great deal from the winter maintenance patrols and emergency services who work in difficult times and yet always go that extra mile to help those who find it hardest to cope in bad weather. Their contribution should be celebrated today. I am grateful to the Scottish Government for recognising the importance of holding a debate on winter resilience now and for setting out its plans for the coming months. Our transport system and national infrastructure are vital, and we must do all that we can to keep Scotland moving through the rain, hail, sleet and snow—some of the most adverse weather conditions. When the elements overwhelm us and travel is no longer safe, we must do all that we can to protect the public. Last winter, as we have heard, the road network came to a grinding halt. Major arteries seized up, motorways came to a standstill and congestion that lasted all through the night spread across central Scotland into the towns and along A roads, preventing whole swathes of the network from being cleared and properly treated. We know that that cannot be allowed to happen again. We do not want to see a repeat of the cost of that disruption to the economy and the distress that it caused families and communities. The past two or three winters have shown us that, however sophisticated and developed it might be, our infrastructure is fragile in adverse conditions. Government contractors cannot always predict the elements, and they can never control them, but they have a duty to be prepared and to put robust contingencies in place. If this winter is anything like last winter, it could test that preparedness and those contingencies to the limit. From Met Office reports, we know that snowfall and prolonged periods of low temperatures, such as we experienced last year, are within the normal range of natural climate variability. I also note that the Met Office is examining research into whether bad winters are clustered. If they are, after two or three years of severe weather, we could be facing another long, cold winter. South Lanarkshire Council in my area is taking steps to ensure that it is as prepared as possible for the coming months. It is issuing advice on road use in winter conditions, has invested in three new Scandinavian gritters and has increased its salt supplies to well over 30,000 tonnes, which is 9,000 tonnes more than last year. In learning about plans that local authorities are putting in place, some questions have arisen that I want to put to the Scottish Government. Has it made arrangements with COSLA that will guarantee a consistent supply of de-icing material and salt stock throughout the long winter months? In the past, some councils have been forced to purchase extra supplies in season, when costs are at their highest. Given that the United Kingdom uses more salt than it actually produces, councils almost always have to import from abroad. That is an expensive business, although I learned recently that when councils agree good deals with suppliers in advance, they can import salt more cheaply than the Government can. Nevertheless, I would like to know how the Scottish Government is co-ordinating the planning and procurement of those supplies to ensure that there is a more comprehensive plan in place to treat Scotland’s roads this year.

I thank the minister for his answer, which was really helpful. How will the Scottish Government facilitate the collaboration between the roads authorities and Transport Scotland, should there be a need to share resources and emergency equipment? The minister may or may not be aware that, last year, South Lanarkshire Council offered its assistance in treating trunk roads. That offer was rejected. Scotland’s roads can be very dangerous during the winter, and drivers have to ensure that they are aware of the hazards and of any travel difficulties that may develop at short notice. I welcome the Scottish Government’s initiative to promote safe winter driving and winter tyres. However, in harsh conditions, it might be safest for drivers not to venture out of the house at all. I hope that the Scottish Government will do all that it can to communicate to the public the importance of travel warnings from the police. When the police tell drivers not to travel unless their journeys are essential, they really mean it. Employers must manage winter absences with care—and definitely with sympathy. They must communicate with authorities about any closing down of workplaces—as we would all expect headteachers to do when deciding whether or not schools should remain open. Although we cannot predict the elements, we should always do our best to prepare for them. The Scottish Government must ensure that Scotland is ready, that we are all prepared, and that the people we serve can keep safe on the roads.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what responses it has received to the consultation on the draft Scottish social housing charter. (S4O-00245)

East Kilbride housing forum has suggested that a standard probationary period should be built into tenancies to help to prevent antisocial behaviour and protect communities against problematic and antisocial tenants. That would build on the legislation that is already in place. Will the minister look into East Kilbride housing forum’s representation? Will he ensure that the new charter balances the rights and responsibilities of tenants?

Members of all parties can agree on the value of work and on the importance of the welfare state to people who are out of work or are unable to work, for whatever reason. As the Department for Work and Pensions takes forward its programme of reform, it must bear in mind that a comprehensive system of benefits and entitlements is not a sign of weakness, a failed economy and a broken Britain, but is an essential component of a caring, compassionate and civilised society. The welfare system in this country is by no means perfect, but we should all take time to remember that the welfare state has great capacity to change lives and support people who are in need. I am concerned about the UK Government’s anti-welfare tone. It is deeply misguided to suggest that the cause of unemployment is unemployment benefit, or that the cause of incapacity is incapacity benefit. I am more than willing to support welfare reforms that are fair, balanced and evidence based, but the scale of the claimant count in the UK is symptomatic of, and not the cause of, the problems in our society. Many of our social ills are products of the mass inequality of the 1980s, from which we have yet to recover. Because inequality is intergenerational, so too are unemployment, poverty and poor public health. That is a lesson that every Government in every part of the United Kingdom should bear in mind before embarking on a series of reforms that will affect many people, especially people who are among the most excluded and vulnerable groups in society. I hope that the UK Government can be made to realise the profound ramifications of the Welfare Reform Bill. I hope that it will acknowledge the need for safeguards to protect people who play by the rules and who seek nothing more from the state than help to support themselves and their dependants in a time of need. The bill will hit families by reducing overall entitlement. It will hit the sick and the disabled. It will hit job seekers by dampening incentives to work and it will hit savers by capping payments to the people who save the most. The universal credit system, which the bill will introduce, will condense a range of gateway benefits into a single benefit, but it is not clear what the new gateway will be. How will the Scottish Government or local authorities determine who is eligible for tax concessions or money off their council tax? How will it decide which families are entitled to extra help with childcare? How will it support families who fall through the cracks? We should remember that after four years of an SNP Government we still use the UK benefits system to decide which children are eligible for free school meals. If council tax benefit is to be replaced by grants to local authorities, what will the implications be for the Scottish budget and for Scottish councils? There is no reference to the proposals in the draft budget and I fear that the Scottish Government might have produced its spending review without taking account of the serious financial consequences of welfare reform. Those concerns are shared by the Scottish campaign on welfare reform. It notes that the UK Government’s green paper and the bill contain proposals on childcare and skills support, but the Scottish Government has not indicated how it will respond. The finance secretary knew that the Welfare Reform Bill was going through the UK Parliament when he planned his draft budget, and he has known about the content of the UK Government’s spending review for months. Where in the budget does he set out his response to welfare reforms or welfare cuts?

No. I am sorry, but I have no time. When the Government lodged its draft memorandum for the as yet unpublished LCM earlier this year, it accepted that there would be financial implications, but it has yet to publish its assessment of the costs and to budget for them. The UK Government is making transitional funding available, but as the Scottish Government has said in a memorandum, it is not clear what costs the DWP will cover. There has been no obvious consideration of the impact that changes might have on childcare, training and public services as a direct—or even indirect—consequence of the Welfare Reform Bill. The Scottish Government will have to respond to those points. Our immediate concern is that the Welfare Reform Bill could receive royal assent in a matter of weeks, and it appears that the Scottish Government is unprepared. We must stand up now for the people who will be affected, and we as a Parliament must speak with one voice against the bill, the motion and the cuts. We may not agree with the UK Government’s welfare reforms, but change is coming. We must do all that we can to ensure that no one in Scotland falls through the cracks. Labour’s amendment, in the name of Jackie Baillie, sets us on the right track and I urge members to give it their full support.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what the career destinations are of mechanical engineering graduates from Scottish universities. (S4O-00211)

Anxiety is felt in the engineering sector about the apparent shortage of job-ready mechanical engineering graduates and about the number of graduates who decide not to pursue a career in the industry. I learned of those difficulties at first hand when Scottish Enterprise arranged for me to visit Clansman Dynamics Ltd, which is a superb engineering firm that is based in Lanarkshire. That company has grown, but its managers are concerned about the pipeline of engineering talent in Scotland. Does the Scottish Government agree that many such problems could be addressed if better links existed between universities and employers? If so, how will it help to foster such partnerships, which are important to the sector?

I have listened carefully to the arguments that have been made on all sides of the debate, and I thank all members who have contributed so far. The Government’s pronouncements on Scottish studies have thrown up more questions than answers. I was interested to hear the minister’s remarks, but a number of points still require some explanation. Perhaps, when he makes his closing speech, he will be able to answer some of my questions and alleviate some of my concerns. I ask the Scottish Government for clarity about why such a change is necessary, how it will be implemented, and what the end product will be. In Scottish schools, pupils already learn about Scottish history, geography, literature and culture. In primary schools, children learn about our national flag, where it came from and what it represents. They also learn about the poetry of Burns and the Burns tradition, which is alive and well in our schools today. In secondary schools, young people learn about Scotland, too. They learn about Scottish dance, Scottish food and Scottish music. They learn about our natural history, our economic history and our social history. Already, our young people routinely learn about this country. Why does the Scottish Government feel that teaching about Scotland and the study of Scotland are so inadequate? If the Government feels that more time should be committed to the study of Scotland, which subjects will lose out? I do not need to remind the minister of the pressures on school timetables and on teachers. He will no doubt have received the same letters and e-mails about the McCormac review as I have. I note that we are holding a debate on Scottish studies months before the working group, chaired by the minister, comes to a final view or issues a final report. There are other issues that demand a more immediate response from the Scottish Government and the immediate attention of the Parliament, such as the increase in teachers’ pension contributions, the erosion of the McCrone agreement, the gap in attainment between better-off youngsters and those from deprived backgrounds, probationary teachers struggling to find work, the levels of youth unemployment and the scandal of the estimated 13,000 school leavers experiencing difficulty with basic literacy and numeracy. Those must be the minister’s priorities for as long as he holds office, as they are far more fundamental to our future.

No, thank you. Will the minister explain why the Scottish Government has used its time in the chamber for a debate on Scottish studies when his working group has yet to complete its work? I also ask for clarification about the curriculum. With curriculum for excellence, schools are supposed to be given greater freedom over what they teach and to promote interdisciplinary learning and crossover with other subjects. Some of the most exciting and innovative learning about Scotland has been a product of curriculum for excellence, so I ask for the minister’s assurance that that kind of innovation will continue. I also ask the Scottish Government to rule out top-down imposition of changes in the curriculum in order to roll out Scottish studies. These decisions should lie first and foremost with the schools themselves. I invite the minister to outline in more detail the content of the new Scottish studies course. What exactly will students of Scottish studies learn and how much of the course content will repeat work that is already done in other subjects? After completing a course of Scottish studies, what qualifications are to be gained and where will those qualifications sit in the qualifications framework? How useful will those qualifications be to students? For example, does the minister envisage that a qualification in Scottish studies will help young people in Scotland to get into university?

No, thank you. I want to continue. As someone who worked in the training sector—at the University of Strathclyde and as an external verifier for the Scottish Qualifications Authority—I think that those points are crucial. I have asked questions of the Government that I hope the minister will answer in his summing-up speech. I have set out my priorities for Scottish education, from supporting the teaching profession to raising attainment and from tackling youth unemployment to dealing with illiteracy and innumeracy. Those are the pressing issues for Scottish education and for Scottish society. They are the issues that demand our attention and which I would have preferred the Scottish Government to debate today.

To ask the Scottish Executive how it promotes the teaching of first aid and life support skills in Scottish schools.

8. Thank you, Presiding Officer—second time lucky. To ask the Scottish Executive how it promotes the teaching of first aid and life support skills in schools. (S4O-00161)

I thank the minister for his response and for his letter to my office on the subject. I welcome assurances that the Scottish Government will work with the British Red Cross, the British Heart Foundation and others to take forward the teaching of emergency life-saving skills. I impress on the minister the importance of emergency life-saving skills, and ask that he joins me and other members in calling for a nationwide roll-out of emergency life-saving skills in every school in every part of Scotland. Will he take it upon himself to monitor that roll-out?

In a conference call, Southern Cross senior management assured me that all care home staff will be transferred to the new operators under the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations. Indeed, I understand that negotiations with staff and trade unions are under way. If those talks are unsuccessful, will the cabinet secretary intervene, and what support will she make available to the care home staff?

I listened carefully to the arguments that were presented and, as interesting as they were, I am ultimately unconvinced of the case that the Scottish Government is making. I have come to that conclusion after spending much of the summer recess speaking to businesses, talking to experts and meeting our economic development agencies to understand what drives growth in Scotland. The issue divides opinion, not just along the traditional fault lines between left and right but even within the business community. Having worked in the private sector, I can safely say that most businesses are perfectly willing to entertain the prospect of tax cuts. The Government did not need to commission any research to tell it that. I also know from first-hand experience that businesses want to be competitive and that they want to function—even flourish—in a competitive and growing economy. However, there is a difference between a competitive economy and a low-tax economy, and there is a difference between competitive taxation and low taxation. We do not need low business taxes to secure growth, but we need to be competitive. We need skills, students, infrastructure, better roads, joined-up railways, faster broadband and an economic strategy that focuses on building prosperity and creating opportunities. Education and investment are essential building blocks for a competitive Scottish economy. They are far more crucial to our economic success than an experiment in corporation tax. There is also something to be said for our part in a strong single market and our common bonds with our friends and neighbours elsewhere in the UK. The devolution of corporation tax could start a race to the bottom as the Governments of the union compete to cut taxes rather than co-operate to raise levels of economic activity.

I am not taking any interventions. I have also heard from accountants who have expressed their doubts about how tax would be policed to protect against tax avoidance and evasion. How can the Scottish Government be certain that a firm that is registered in Scotland under the Scotland Bill proposals contributes to the Scottish economy? Tax incentives could lead to companies relocating head offices without bringing jobs, wealth and investment with them. Where do the proposals leave the Government’s aim of simplifying business taxation? There is nothing simple about investing or operating in a single market in which there are two or three separate rates of corporation tax. To its credit, the Scottish Government has at least got people in the business community talking about taxation and asking what more can be done to boost GDP, improve productivity and stimulate investment. For what it is worth, I agree that there might well be some merit in looking at taxation in this country and asking whether we have got the balance right. However, the United Kingdom is already on course to have the lowest level of corporation tax in the G7. I am afraid that I simply do not believe that anything is to be gained by cutting the rate of corporation tax any further. Indeed, like other members, I am gravely concerned about an economic policy that gambles the future of public services and hard-pressed public sector workers on a corporate tax break. If the Scottish Government wants to help businesses, especially small and medium-sized enterprises, and support Scotland’s consumers, I invite it to join Scottish Labour in calling on the chancellor to reverse his VAT hike and give the economy the boost that it needs right now. I have argued that education and investment are essential for our future prosperity and that businesses and investors need a competitive tax environment. However, I have also pointed out that there is more to being competitive than cutting corporation tax. Even in this time of austerity, we can choose to gamble growth on a corporate tax cut, but investment in our people, our potential and our infrastructure is a surer route to success.

It has come to my attention that South Lanarkshire College, which is one of the best colleges in Scotland, has turned away prospective students, not because they did not meet the entry requirements but because of a lack of funded college places in comparison with Glasgow and the surrounding area. Many qualified young people and school leavers in South Lanarkshire have to travel to Glasgow for further education, which is paid for by the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. Does the cabinet secretary agree that we can make savings in the student support bill by distributing weighted student units of measurement more equally across Scotland?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive when it plans to publish a new strategy for museums and galleries. (S4O-00134)

I commend to the cabinet secretary the national museum of rural life in East Kilbride, which I had the pleasure of visiting over the summer recess. Very particular skills are required to maintain collections in specialist museums, not only in agricultural museums but in mining and industrial museums. Will the cabinet secretary ensure that the museums and galleries strategy takes full account of the skills, needs and requirements of the sector?

Under the previous Labour-led Administration, level 4 budget figures were published as a matter of course. That gave the Parliament and its committees the detail that was necessary to fully scrutinise the budget. In the interests of transparency, will the cabinet secretary reverse his decision to withhold level 4 information and ensure that MSPs, parliamentary committees and the wider public are better placed to assess the impacts of underspending and of the budget as a whole?

I welcome the reference to Scottish Labour’s living wage in the cabinet secretary’s statement. Will he clarify how the proposals will affect low-paid workers? Has he carried out his own assessment of how many council workers are likely to opt out of the local pension scheme? If so, what impact will the changes have on pension schemes across the public sector and what are the implications, when they reach retirement age, for those who opt out?

I pay tribute to all those members who have delivered their maiden speech today and last week. I take this opportunity to thank some of my predecessors from the previous session, including my good friend Andy Kerr, whose contribution to the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Labour Party has been invaluable. I am delighted to have been elected by the people of Central Scotland to represent them in this Parliament. During the course of the election, and in recent days and weeks, a great deal of attention has been given to the difficulties that face young people as they struggle to gain employment in these uncertain times. Recently published statistics show that North Lanarkshire, South Lanarkshire and Falkirk, which are all in my region, Central Scotland, have some of the highest claimant counts in Scotland. For example, in South Lanarkshire alone, 2,685 16 to 24-year-olds are claiming jobseekers allowance. My party, the Labour Party, has always put full square and centre the need to address the challenge of youth unemployment, because behind those statistics lie a personal tragedy for every one of those young people and a social tragedy for communities the length and breadth of Scotland. If we accomplish anything during the next five years, we must give those young people hope for the future, by giving them real jobs and real opportunities. There are skills gaps and shortages in our economy. Employers, training providers and the Government must all work together to plug the skills gap, and if they can do so successfully, traditional industries and the new economy will prosper. Last week I visited East Kilbride & District Engineering Group Training Association, which is a centre of excellence for engineering and craft apprenticeships. I saw for myself the sense of worth and value that training and skills bring to young apprentices. We must ensure that other young people have the same opportunities. I was impressed by the confidence of not just the young apprentices I met in East Kilbride but the company, which is confident about its future and is—even in these difficult times—investing in a new-build extension. The Scottish Government must build on that example of good practice if we are serious about taking Scotland forward. Scotland needs more apprenticeships, more jobs for the unemployed, more support for small businesses, more investment in our infrastructure and more support for first-time buyers. Those are my priorities for the Parliament and I hope that they are the Scottish Government’s priorities, too. Just as the training company in East Kilbride is tooling up for the future, so must we tool up. We need a vision for a strong and sustainable economy and we need a plan to make it happen. We need a plan to get Scots back into work and a plan for their families. We need a plan that takes the best from our proud industrial heritage and focuses firmly on future opportunities in green jobs, bio-engineering and tourism. The people of Scotland are not daft. They do not expect miracles. However, they do expect conviction and they deserve a Government that is focused on what really matters: jobs, skills and growth. Times are tough, but if we invest today in those priorities we can build for tomorrow. I take this opportunity to thank all the Scottish Parliament staff for their tremendous help to me and other members in helping us all to settle in. I have been genuinely overwhelmed by their support, professionalism and can-do attitude. If we could capture those intangible skills and give them to everyone the length and breadth of the country, without doubt we would take Scotland forward.