These amendments aim to deal with the issues that were raised in evidence sessions about the idea to link planning fees to performance. The questions on the proposals on planning fees were among the most frequently answered of all the consultation questions, and many concerns were raised. The amendments that I have lodged seek either to remove section 41 entirely or to add in certain safeguards to the process. Amendment 10 seeks to ensure that the “Scottish Ministers must prepare and publish guidance setting out the principles to which they must have regard in determining whether the functions of a planning authority are not being, or have not been, performed satisfactorily” and that they must outline that guidance to the Parliament. Nowhere are the definitions of “satisfactory” or “non-satisfactory” performance set out. The concept could be very subjective, but amendment 10 would ensure that the process is rigorous. I welcome the fact that Derek Mackay confirmed at stage 2 that the Scottish Government would provide assistance to improve the performance of a planning authority before resources are removed. However, I still feel that that should be a statutory requirement listed in the bill and that all reasonable steps should be taken before the ministers are allowed to place sanctions on a planning authority. Amendment 11 would add that approach to the bill. Amendment 11 seeks to ensure that a planning authority is not adversely affected by the provisions, either in its performance or the range of services offered. If the provisions are genuinely meant to improve and incentivise planning authorities, it makes no sense to penalise a planning authority to such an extent that it further affects its performance. That could result in it being penalised further as a result of something that might be no fault of its own and could introduce unnecessary financial uncertainty around its funding. Amendment 12 is self-explanatory. It states that the level and period for which the lower fees are put in place would not “adversely affect the performance of, or, as the case may be, the range of services offered by the planning authority.” Amendment 13 asks that before making any changes “the Scottish Ministers must lay before the Scottish Parliament a statement setting out ... the percentage variation by which, and the period for which, they propose to vary the fee or charge.” That would ensure that power cannot be misused, and it would offer safeguards that I feel are not currently explicitly set out in the bill. It would also allow for parliamentary scrutiny of the changes, which would provide additional safeguards that are not currently in the bill. These four amendments would not drastically alter the function of section 41 but would strengthen them by adding safeguards that are not currently present. They would ensure that planning authorities are not unfairly penalised and they would allow parliamentary scrutiny of the changes. They would also add more transparency and openness to the bill. I hope that that is something that we can all support. Failing section 41 being amended, my amendment 14 seeks to remove it from the bill in its entirety. As COSLA stated in a letter to the committee, the proposed changes represent “fundamentally too much Ministerial interference in the operations of specific council services.” It is the job of the democratically elected councillors, not central Government, to scrutinise the process. The Scottish Government is demonstrating, through the bill, a worrying trend towards centralisation. We should not be taking functions away from local councils but extending them through more devolution. The amendments are also supported by Scottish Environment LINK. I am grateful for its support. If the rest of my amendments fall, removing section 41 will be the only sensible option, as the section will potentially give the Scottish ministers too much control over the planning process. No safeguards exist in the bill itself. There is nothing to ensure that all reasonable steps will be taken to improve the performance of the planning authority, and there is no function in the bill to provide proper parliamentary scrutiny of any proposed variation in fees. COSLA has made it clear that it does not support the current approach, for the reasons that I have already given. I move amendment 10.

It is disappointing that the Government will not accept my amendments. It seems to me that it made its mind up at an early stage of the bill’s passage. Despite what COSLA and now Scottish Environment LINK have said, the Government will not listen to any arguments. The fact that the minister has just mentioned incentivising by removing funding through fees says more about the Government than it does about the bill. I press my amendment.

As Murdo Fraser said, I have been dogged with regard to the varying of planning authority fees, having pushed my amendments at stage 2 and stage 3. I am disappointed that the Government was not persuaded to support the amendments, because I believe that they were sensible and responsible amendments that either added safeguards where none currently exists or sought to remove section 41 if additional safeguards were not introduced.

If I have time.

However, the issue is the varying of fees as a sanction against planning authorities. Democratically elected councillors already sit on planning authorities and I am confident that they understand their responsibilities. Audit Scotland already monitors planning authorities’ performance and makes recommendations to address any concerns that it has, so why is the Government so intent on penalising them? In a response to my stage 2 amendments, the Minister for Local Government and Planning, Derek Mackay, stated that section 41 would “improve behaviour and outcomes, and there will be no loss of income because planning authorities will step up to the plate.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 11 September 2013; c 3187.] That is a glib remark, which implies that planning authorities will do better if they are threatened with sanctions. As a former council leader, the minister knows that delays can occur for all sorts of reasons. As Unison Scotland indicated, “Delays are due to underfunding and heavy workloads … there is a range of community planning partners involved in the process”, such as Scottish Water and SEPA, but “There are no proposals to introduce carrots or sticks for these organisations.” The proposal is a clear attack on planning authorities if no other organisation is being taken to task. That is why I believed that it made sense for the Government to be required to lay a statement before the Parliament before any action was taken so that the issue could be scrutinised. However, the Scottish Government does not support that move. Surely more transparency and scrutiny of Government decisions should be welcomed. Are we to assume that the Government’s priority is quantity rather than quality? What happens to local accountability if the Government will step in when it decides that a planning authority is underperforming? Despite all that the minister has said about the high-level group working with the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, when I spoke to COSLA yesterday it was still of the view that there is fundamentally too much ministerial interference in the operations of a specific council service and that it would be counter-productive to reduce fees. COSLA also believes that, before the section is enacted, there must be agreement between it and the Government on what counts as good performance. I reiterate the calls for that to be made clear so that planning authorities know exactly what is considered satisfactory and unsatisfactory performance. It should not be left up to one person’s subjective view. I am disheartened that the Scottish Government decided not to support my amendments because, even if section 41 remained, the other amendments would have introduced more transparency in the process, allowed for greater scrutiny and oversight of decisions and made clear to local authorities exactly what was expected of them. I would be grateful if the minister could address in his closing speech some of those concerns and offer reassurances that the Scottish Government will work closely with COSLA and other stakeholders to get an agreement regarding the issues that are still outstanding in section 41.

I welcome the optimistic predictions that are based on indicators that are outlined in the state of the economy Government report, but note the underlying theme of the fragile nature of the current state of the economy and its recovery that runs through the document. A more optimistic picture is presented, but we must not be complacent because, as the report states, there is “growing recovery in the UK, US, and more recently in the Euro Area”. It states: “sustaining the recovery in Scotland into the medium term will require an improvement in underlying competitiveness, linked to a sustained pick up in productivity and real wages.” If those aspects fail to pick up, we could easily find the recovery stagnating. Page 28 of the report states: “there is still a significant number of people in employment who would like to work more hours.” I have spoken before in the chamber about the scourge of underemployment and zero-hours contracts, and I still believe that we must tackle that to get our economy back on track. Zero-hours contracts offer insecurity and unpredictability. That often means that the individual is underemployed for a significant period of time, and there is, of course, all the income uncertainty, the turmoil of benefit claims and the arranging of childcare associated with zero-hours contracts, which cause much misery for those who have no option but to accept such work. According to the Office for National Statistics, in 2012 250,000 people across the UK were working under a zero-hours contract. That is the highest number that there has ever been. The Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s underemployment inquiry showed that people want to work more hours, but the opportunities to do so do not exist, and they are classed as being in full-time employment. As of September 2012, there were 264,000 underemployed workers in Scotland, or 10.7 per cent of Scotland’s 2.48 million workforce. As I have previously stated in the chamber, the Scottish Council for Development and Industry has described underemployment as “a long-term challenge for the economy of Scotland.” It is clear that we need to meet those challenges head on if we are to sustain our recovery. The Procurement Reform (Scotland) Bill gives us the opportunity to tackle underemployment and zero-hours contracts in public-funded contracts. In September 2013, Ed Miliband pledged to ban the exploitative use of zero-hours contracts when Labour returns to government. Will the SNP match that pledge, using the Procurement Reform (Scotland) Bill to lead the way and lay the groundwork for a better and fairer Scottish economy? On real wage increases, we should support the living wage. I find it disappointing that that is not mentioned anywhere in the Government’s Procurement Reform (Scotland) Bill.

We need to have the living wage across the board. It is all well and good telling us that things will be better under independence, but why should the public believe that, when the Government does not use the powers that it has to protect workers and grow the Scottish economy now? In uncertain financial times, we need a Government that is committed to looking for ways to grow the economy, not a campaign vehicle. The independence referendum adds another layer of uncertainty. According to the Financial Times 2014 survey, many respondents believed that independence would hurt the Scottish economy and the rest of the UK, and that the current uncertainty about what will happen will undermine confidence in the Scottish and UK economies. We do not need uncertainty. People are crying out for action now, not in 12 months or even later.

I am in my last minute; I am sorry. Independence is a distraction, not a solution to our economic future. The Government should be using the powers that it currently has to improve the quality of life for all Scots. Therefore, can we get a firm commitment today that the Procurement Reform (Scotland) Bill will be used to tackle underemployment and zero-hours contracts, and to introduce the living wage in public service contracts?

I certainly hope that I do not get the white paper in my Christmas stocking; I am sure that I will not. As a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, I look forward to taking part in the debate. The bill is designed to ensure that the people of Scotland have access to fair and just processes of debt advice, debt relief and debt management but, as it stands, it does not go far enough to protect people who are in debt and it could be seen to favour creditors. That is why I believe that it needs to be amended at stage 2 before I could consider supporting it. There is much that I could talk about in relation to the bill, such as including access to bank accounts for bankrupts—on which I am glad that the minister has written to ask for advice—and the provision of money advice and how it could be resourced. The minister said that it is anticipated that around 500 more people would seek money advice, but money advice agencies are already under a great deal of pressure. I think that further resources need to be provided to help with the provision of such advice.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. “Relatively manageable” does not mean that the agencies concerned will have the resources to provide such advice. We received evidence to the effect that clarification is needed of what the bill means by “financial education”. Does that mean education in school or education that would be undertaken when someone enters a debt arrangement? Mention was made of the fact that such education could be provided electronically. As Mr Fraser said, that might throw up difficulties for some people in Scotland, particularly in rural areas that have slow broadband. Although I welcome the common financial tool, it would be better if provision for it were made on the face of the bill. That would future proof the measure and would mean—as Citizens Advice Scotland stated—that it could not be changed without full scrutiny. Having made those points, I would like to develop my argument on the extension of the period for debt repayments from 36 to 48 months and the proposals for the minimal asset process, which will replace the low-income, low-assets process. The proposal to increase the debt repayment period to 48 months is ill advised. Instead of offering debt relief, it will extend the period of hardship. Rather than meaning that people who are in debt will have more time to pay, it will mean another 12 months of payments to creditors and another 12 months of struggle, and it will increase the likelihood of their defaulting on the arrangement. The change would mean that Scots would have to pay back more to creditors than debtors in any other part of the UK. The majority of respondents to the consultation felt that it was not required and, indeed, that view was supported by a wide range of organisations throughout Scotland such as StepChange Debt Charity Scotland, Money Advice Scotland, Glasgow Central Citizens Advice Bureau and the Govan Law Centre. I heard the minister’s comments about what happens in England but, as my colleague Kezia Dugdale pointed out, he was comparing apples with oranges. Ms Dugdale also gave a very clear explanation of the difference between the two situations.

I do not think that I have time to take another intervention. I simply ask the minister to reconsider at stage 2 the proposed change from the current 36 to 48 months. I will move on to the minimal asset process—or MAP, as it will be known—which will replace the low income, low assets route. As the committee heard in evidence and as we have heard many times this afternoon, the maximum fee level of £100 will still be prohibitive for many people. However, it is an improvement on the misguided increase to £200 for LILA, a move that Labour and Citizens Advice Scotland did not support. Citizens Advice Scotland said that having a fee will leave some debtors struggling to afford it, because it is very difficult for people to save up any money when they are in debt. Although I understand that the Accountant in Bankruptcy is to be self-financing, I would like the bill to be amended to allow the fee to be waived. The Accountant in Bankruptcy should have the powers to introduce a full exemption for individuals who meet certain criteria with regard to the ability to pay. Ideally there should be no fee but, if it is to remain in place, I believe that a fee waiver would go some way towards removing the barriers for those who genuinely cannot afford the £100. Let us remember that MAP is for people who are on benefits or have no assets and that, while they try to save for the fee, the interest on their debts will be increasing. I was also concerned about the proposal for a maximum debt level of £10,000 for MAP, given that there was no limit for LILA. I am pleased that the minister has reconsidered the matter and will raise the limit to £17,000, but I have to say that I heard no valid reason for making this particular proposal in the first place. StepChange estimated that in 2012 the average debt level of its clients was around £14,500, which means that 50 per cent of its clients would not have been eligible for MAP. Moreover, according to the Accountant in Bankruptcy’s own data, almost 65 per cent of current LILA clients would not be eligible.

The Carrington Dean Group, which offers financial advice, stated that the figure is too low and should be more in line with the average level of the debts of those who use the low income, low asset process, which is around £17,000. I am therefore very pleased that the minister has taken those comments on board.

I am sure that many of us in the chamber will have been involved in campaigning against payday loans in our areas. I, too, thank Kezia Dugdale and congratulate her on securing the debate. I welcome the Financial Conduct Authority’s latest plans to regulate the payday loans industry, which would mean the introduction of stricter requirements, such as affordability checks on the borrower, a crackdown on advertisements, and limiting loan rollovers to two. Although those stricter requirements will go some way towards addressing the issues with the payday loans industry, they are—as the motion says—just the “beginning”; more needs to be done. Payday loans cause financial misery for many people. The industry is a predatory one that preys on those who are already struggling financially. That can be seen in the influx of people who are going to citizens advice bureaux throughout Scotland to get advice on their increasing debt resulting from payday loans. Those debts get worse at this time of year as people struggle to juggle the financial pressures of Christmas with the rest of their bills. In Scotland, we do not have to wait for the Westminster Government to take action on the industry; we could and should do more right now. Regulation of the industry is a reserved matter, but we could look at other options, such as working with councils and credit unions to offer alternatives, and establishing a loan guarantee fund in Scotland. Labour councillor Joe Cullinane is leading the way in North Ayrshire Council. He recently lodged a motion that urged the Scottish National Party council to look into how the council can best support credit unions and promote financial literacy and affordable lending. It is also hoped that the council will consider measures to limit the number of payday lenders, bookmakers and pawnbrokers on our high streets. The Scottish Parliament and councils across Scotland have the opportunity to work with credit unions. An example of that is the excellent financial inclusion project that is run by First Alliance in Kilwinning, which is funded by the local council and the Scottish Government to offer people an alternative to payday lenders. We could offer extra support to credit unions through a loan guarantee fund, which would allow them to lend to riskier clients on the basis that the risk of default would be borne by the Scottish Government instead of by the credit union. That would allow credit unions to offer same-day credit and reduce risk from defaulters. Perhaps the minister will tell us today what the Scottish Government’s position is on establishing a loan guarantee fund. I am pleased that the Scottish Government has adopted the wealth warnings that the debtbusters campaign was pushing for, which highlight the dangers of payday loans this Christmas throughout the “12 days of Debtmas”. However, of course, payday loan companies constantly bombard people with texts and phone-calls to offer them loans. Many people already understand the dangers of payday loans, but they do not know of alternatives for a quick loan. We can and should be offering viable alternatives. Although we have started to address the problem, we need to accelerate the work with councils and credit unions in order to make sure that affordable alternatives exist, and we need to establish a loan guarantee fund.

Unsurprisingly, I will not support the Conservative motion. I cannot support the lack of reality that underlies the sentiment that would see working people and the vulnerable in our society worse off. The truth is that, since David Cameron came to office, working people are on average £1,600 worse off. The autumn statement does nothing to tackle the cost of living crisis. We have a flatlining economy in which prices have risen faster than wages for the past 40 out of 41 months during Cameron’s term. Osborne celebrated our recovery and growth, but the fact is that growth is meagre—far lower than in Germany, America and many other countries, as we have heard. This is the slowest recovery for 100 years. The autumn statement was a chance for the coalition Government to provide real benefits. For example, it could have announced an energy price freeze and saved every Scottish household £120 as well as making long-term changes to the energy market, but it did not. It could have announced that it would scrap the damaging welfare reforms, but it did not. It could have announced real measures for growth, but it did not. What about the coalition Government’s promise to balance the books by 2015? In 2015, borrowing will be £79 billion, so I am not sure what books the Government is trying to balance—certainly not the budget. By 2016, borrowing will be £197 billion higher than was expected when forecasts were made in June 2010, as we have heard numerous times this afternoon. In 2010, we were promised increased living standards, growth, and cuts to the deficit, yet the coalition Government has failed every test it has set for itself. There is still no recovery—in fact, there are more people living in poverty now than there were at the start of the Con-Dem Government. The coalition Government is out of touch. Not only is it not working for ordinary working people, it is not working for anyone—unless, of course, they are one of the fortunate few earning more than £150,000, who received a huge tax cut. It is becoming increasing clear that, to benefit from the coalition, people need to be one of the elite few. In Scotland, we feel the pain of the coalition Government’s programme of austerity but, through the Barnett consequentials, we are set to get an additional £308 million over the next two years. That money could be used—as Labour’s amendment to the motion states—to extend early learning and childcare to 50 per cent of two-year-olds. That would mean that the Scottish Government could start to implement transformational childcare changes now. There is no need to wait—it is time to get Scotland off pause and start tackling child poverty. The Scottish Government has the power, but does it have the will to do it? Nicola Sturgeon MSP stated during the launch of the white paper that the reason for not delivering a transformational childcare strategy is that the money raised would go into the coffers of the UK Treasury. Does that mean that if Scotland votes no, this Government will never deliver that strategy, despite the fact that it is well within its power? If the cabinet secretary will not agree today to start implementing those changes, will he at least assure us that, in the event of a no vote, this Government will start delivering for Scotland? Or is childcare just another political carrot to try to attract a yes vote?

Do I have time, Presiding Officer?

I am sorry, Mr Mason, but I am out of time. We stand ready to work with the Scottish Government on improved childcare now, because we can implement measures now to help many struggling families across Scotland. The autumn statement is more of the same from the UK Government: tax cuts for the elite few and misery for the masses, with no hope of the economic growth, the increased living standards or the cuts to the deficit that we were promised. The economy is flatlining and Osborne has privatised the defibrillator. However, I do not agree with the Scottish Government that the only solution is to vote yes. The solution is to get rid of the out-of-touch UK Government and vote in a Labour Government that will work for working people and the disadvantaged in our society because establishing new borders in an increasingly connected world will not help to tackle inequality or improve living standards across Scotland. With the extra money from the Barnett consequentials, I call on the Scottish Government to start work on the promised transformational childcare strategy now. Thanks to devolution, we have the opportunity to make a real difference to families across Scotland now and that is what we should be doing.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to tackle fuel poverty. (S4O-02680)

Sharp rises in gas and electricity prices have plunged more families into fuel poverty across Scotland, and we are now fast approaching 1 million households in fuel poverty. As the minister has said, the white paper proposes to reduce energy bills by around 5 per cent by moving the cost of some environmental schemes from energy bills and funding them instead from central Government resources. Is it not the case that that 5 per cent, which is an average saving of approximately 20p a day, would be added to taxation? With the sharp rises in energy prices, how does this Government aim to meet the statutory 2016 target to eradicate fuel poverty?

As convener of the cross-party group on housing, I looked forward to taking part in this debate on housing—a debate that the Labour Party had to bring to the chamber because the housing minister, Margaret Burgess, has failed to lead a single parliamentary debate on the subject, which shows that housing is not a priority for the SNP. We have heard that Scotland is facing its biggest housing crisis since the second world war. Under this Government, the capital housing budget has fallen by a massive 29 per cent from £534 million to £378 million, and according to Audit Scotland it is set to fall even further to just £250 million. New housing completions and new starts have fallen across Scotland, house building in the private sector has halved in recent years, and since 2005 councils and registered social landlords have built 14,000 fewer homes than have been needed. It is time for the Government to come forward with a plan for investment that encourages growth in the housing sector and ensures that housing is built that is affordable and adequate to meet the needs of Scotland’s population. The Government promised that we would build our way out of the recession, but Scotland is still waiting. Also, any new housing must be energy efficient. The Government has set the statutory target to eradicate fuel poverty by 2016, but the budget is underspent. I recently attended the Scottish rural and islands housing conference 2013. It is clear that many of the challenges that affect urban areas are magnified in rural areas. It is much more expensive to build houses the further north one goes, and on our islands. Rural and remote areas also have a much higher proportion of homes that have no access to mains gas and which can be deemed to be hard to heat, not to mention that there are cooler temperatures in those areas in the winter. Those areas suffer disproportionately because of the higher costs of building new homes and by having less energy efficient housing and heating methods. The report “A Minimum Income Standard for Remote Rural Scotland” shows that a pensioner who lives in a rural area must spend two to three times as much as their urban counterpart to heat their home. I also recently discovered that the big six energy companies are not providing boiler replacements to oil fuelled homes or to liquid petroleum gas fuelled homes. That means that many residents in the hardest to heat homes are missing out on a 30 per cent increase in boiler efficiency, not to mention savings in fuel costs. What is the Scottish Government doing to support people in that situation in order to ensure that they do not miss out on energy efficiency schemes, as they appear to be doing currently? It is concerning that the budget for energy efficiency schemes and retrofitting has had a £10 million underspend. How do we expect to meet the targets if we are not using the budget to its full potential? The money could and should be used to reduce fuel costs for the hardest to heat homes. Why has it not been used in that way, and how did the underspend occur? How does the Government intend to meet its statutory requirement to eradicate fuel poverty by 2016? When it comes to building energy efficient, affordable homes and when it comes to fuel poverty, the Government needs to up its game to meet its own targets for building new homes and eradicating fuel poverty by 2016. Now, more than ever, we need to get Scotland off pause and restarted. We need action now, not the promise of action after September 2014. I support Labour’s motion, which calls on the Government to produce a comprehensive, ambitious and inclusive national housing action plan.

17. To ask the Scottish Government what work it carries out to identify and support people with dyslexia. (S4O-02608)

It is estimated that one in 10 people in Scotland is affected by some form of dyslexia. The condition can present in various ways, which means that it can be difficult to identify. At a recent conference on dyslexia that I attended, it was said that trainee teachers spend only a few hours on the subject.

I am just getting to it. Early identification is paramount in giving extra confidence and support in education to those with dyslexia. Should more time be spent at teacher training colleges on techniques to identify dyslexia, to help trainee teachers identify the signs of dyslexia, so that pupils get the support that they need?

I am happy to take part in the debate as a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. The Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill aims to cut back on the hoops that certain organisations need to jump through by streamlining and standardising certain parts of the process. However, I have several concerns that I hope will, at the very least, be addressed at stage 2. I will focus on the increasingly centralised agenda that is displayed in the bill and the planning changes that are set out. I will also briefly mention street traders’ licences. Local democracy is central to our society and, where possible, we should devolve powers to where they are most applicable. Although we all support consistency, we must not strip local councils of their functions. In written evidence to the committee, COSLA spokesperson Michael Cook stated: “Local communities should remain empowered and have the right to differing standards to reflect different locally required outcomes.”

I need some time to proceed. Unison stated in written evidence: “Authorities must be able to set their own standards and respond to local situations. National standards and systems conflict with the bottom up approach recommended in the Christie Commission report which the Government welcomed. Local authorities have a range of different aims”.

COSLA was very straightforward in not supporting the proposal. I will use another quote from COSLA later in my speech. I fully agree that, in most cases, there is no one-size-fits-all solution. Planning authorities operate in diverse communities and need different strategies and solutions for their own unique situations. Otherwise, we run the risk of national standards undermining local democracy.

I will do so if the minister is brief.

I thank the minister for that intervention, but I think that all those who gave evidence agreed that removing funding from a local planning authority would be detrimental to that authority. We should not be looking to burden local authorities with a set of national standards that do not work for them. Although I acknowledge the need for consistency, I argue that it might be better for that to be provided not by central Government but through best practice guidelines and co-ordination. The proposal to link planning application fees to the performance of the planning authority would mean that the Scottish ministers could reduce fees to underperforming planning authorities when it was felt that they were operating less than satisfactorily. We need to be extremely careful about the way in which the proposal is implemented. Despite the proposal forming a relatively small part of the bill, the question on it was one of the most frequently answered of all the consultation questions. The Royal Town Planning Institute stated in its submission that it was “disappointed that Ministers intend to pursue a statutory mechanism to penalise authorities who they consider under perform”. It went on to say that it would be “counterproductive to withdraw funding”, and that “a national continuous improvement programme ... should be put in place”. What does the Government mean by unsatisfactory performance? That is not defined anywhere in the bill. Who will make the decision about whether performance is satisfactory or unsatisfactory? In an earlier intervention, the minister mentioned that there was a working group. When will that working group report to the committee or to the Parliament?

Yes.

I am now running very short of time. What role will democratically elected councillors play under the new system? I understood that it was their job to scrutinise the process. Is that function to be removed? COSLA is not supportive of the bill’s proposal, as Stephen Hagan stated in his letter to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, in which he described it as “fundamentally too much Ministerial interference in the operations of a specific council service”. What discussions is the Scottish Government having with councils to resolve the issue? What role will councillors have under the new system? I hope that the Scottish Government will take on board the concerns that I have raised and make the necessary changes at stage 2 to avoid the distinct feeling of creeping centralisation that local authorities are experiencing in relation to some of the proposals in the bill.

Carbon capture and storage is a subject with which I have had dealings in parliamentary committees and at a local level, when Ayrshire Power proposed to develop an experimental CCS plant at Hunterston in North Ayrshire. The problem with the Hunterston development was that the proposal was only partial CCS to start with, to be converted to full capacity CCS at some point in future. Concerns were raised about the success of the method of conversion and the costs associated with storing the captured carbon, not to mention the lack of information on the environmental impact. The highly controversial plans received more than 20,000 objections and were refused by the North Ayrshire planning authority. Eventually, Ayrshire Power withdrew the plans, citing the state of the market and the lack of funding opportunities as reasons for doing so. At the same time, it withdrew its submission to the UK Government’s CCS commercialisation competition, which would have awarded a £1 billion grant to develop a site with 90 per cent carbon capture and storage. The Longannet project also had to withdraw for economic reasons. I am pleased, however, that the CCS commercialisation competition has since moved on and that Peterhead is listed as one of the preferred bidders. If the Peterhead bid is accepted, it could create up to 1,000 jobs in the north-east. The plant would also be the first of its type in the world, because Norway had to abandon its plan for a full-scale CCS plant at its Mongstad oil refinery after the Norwegian Government determined that it would be too costly and concerns were raised over the difficulties and timescales involved in development. If the technology proves to be viable, this would be a great achievement for Scotland and it would be in line with our goal to create greener energy technology. It would also assist the shift towards decarbonisation and help us to meet our carbon reduction target, which we have so far failed to meet. Clearly, we need to up our game if we aim to achieve the 2030 target to slash 80 per cent of carbon emissions produced from electricity generation. However, we cannot be too reliant on CCS in case the bid runs into problems or—as has been mentioned—the technology fails to deliver. We also cannot depend on “CCS-ready” plants because there are no assurances that that technology will work, as it is still under development. As Mr Fraser and other members have said, we need a realistic plan B. That said, I welcome the motion’s support for the Peterhead scheme, although I note that it is critical of the timescales involved. According to the House of Commons library, the timescales are as follows: the signature of front-end engineering and design contracts by summer 2013; the final investment decision from DECC on up to two projects by early 2015; and operational by 2016 to 2020. I, too, have concerns about those timescales, although I imagine that it is for a different reason. I wonder whether the minister could enlighten us as to whether this development and independence are compatible. It seems to me that, given that this is UK money, a yes vote in the referendum could put the project at serious risk. Why would a Government award what would in essence be a competing foreign power £1 billion to develop technology when that investment could be put into its own power stations? Can the minister tell the Parliament today what discussions, if any, the Scottish Government has had with the UK Government about the CCS commercialisation competition—or is this another case of “Don’t ask questions; assume everything will be all right on the night”? Perhaps the Scottish Government is going to pledge £1 billion to fund the project in the event that UK funding is withdrawn. Or perhaps, more cynically, that is why the Scottish Government is asking the UK Government to hurry up and make its decision. As already noted, with many carbon capture and storage projects at a very early stage of technical development, funding is crucial because many companies are unable to provide the necessary level of funding or do not want to take the risk. I apologise that I was unable to attend the briefing this morning because of other parliamentary commitments. Furthermore, when countries such as Norway—which of course an independent Scotland is so often compared with—are deeming development too costly, I am unsure how Scotland could go it alone in developing CCS technology. On this matter, Scotland is stronger together with others as part of the UK community. Scotland has a chance to be a world leader in CCS technology and this is indeed an example of where we are distinctly better together.

I, too, welcome the cabinet secretary’s statement, given the importance of Prestwick airport to the Ayrshire and Scottish economies. Given that the three Ayrshire local authorities have committed £2 million each, will they be partners in the Scottish Government’s bid? What role will they play if the bid is successful?

The Scottish economy is a vitally important subject that requires the Parliament’s full attention. It saddens me, therefore, that the Scottish Government’s motion—and what we have heard from SNP members so far—seems to be more about independence than it is about the Scottish economy. I assume that independence is the focus of the debate, and that Scotland is still on pause. It is becoming increasingly obvious that what we have is no longer a Government but a campaign vehicle, which, instead of focusing on the real issues, would rather use every debate in the chamber to focus on independence. None of the bills that are listed in this year’s programme sets outs radical plans to support economic growth and provide jobs. The Government is taking its eye off the ball in pursuit of a single-minded issue.

If the member gives me a minute to proceed, I will. I am happy to participate in a debate on the Scottish economy if we discuss an economic strategy and what we will do to stimulate the economy with the powers that we currently have.

The Government needs to use the powers that it has. We should be using this debate to highlight issues that matter to ordinary Scots, such as the need to invest in an educated and skilled workforce. Throughout Scotland, one in five of our young people is unemployed. In North Ayrshire, which is the area that I represent, youth unemployment—and unemployment in general—is still a very serious issue, with 13.4 per cent of people under 25 receiving jobseekers allowance. I do not imagine that the Audit Scotland report that shows that there are now 48,000 fewer college places—a 16 per cent reduction in one year—fills those young people with confidence, and nor will the news that colleges face a further 11 per cent reduction in public funding by 2015. That is not conducive to creating an educated and skilled workforce. At a local level, I am holding an employment fair that I hope will match some of the unemployed with employers who have vacancies and let others know of the opportunities that are available to them. However, that is only a drop in the ocean—we need to do much more. Although I welcome the appearance of some signs of a fragile economic recovery, I am worried that it is based on unsustainable practices such as the use of zero-hours contracts and underemployment.

No, I need to make progress. We do not have exact figures for the number of Scots on such contracts, but we know that the numbers are increasing and that the issue has a distinct gender dimension. Women’s Enterprise Scotland noted in evidence to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that it was “seeing more zero-hours contracts for the sort of low-pay service sector jobs that many women have.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 30 January 2013; c 2408.] It is clear that we need to act on such contracts, as they are exploitative and strip away workers’ rights. They are unsustainable in the Scottish economy, offer no security for workers and are being misused under the banner of flexible working.

If the member gives me a minute. Such contracts also create havoc in the lives of those who are claiming benefit and trying to organise childcare.

Exactly—I will go on and make a suggestion on that point. Currently, contractors on Scottish Government contracts such as the Borders railway make use of zero-hours contracts, as do many of our universities. The Scottish Government can do something about that now. It will come as no surprise that I welcome Labour’s commitment to banning the exploitative use of those contracts, but the Government could—and should—be doing something about it now. Through the forthcoming procurement reform bill, the Scottish Government could at least protect workers who are employed in public contracts. Has that option been considered? Will the Scottish Government match our commitment and lead by example? I do not see anything positive about unemployment increasing by 10,000 in the past quarter and a situation in which at least 10.7 per cent of Scotland’s workforce is defined as underemployed, a figure that has increased by 76,000 since 2008. The Scottish Council for Development and Industry described underemployment as “a long-term challenge for the economy of Scotland.” It is clear that we need to tackle it. Will the cabinet secretary point to exactly where it is addressed in the forthcoming legislative programme? That highlights the issue that our economy may be being propped up by some damaging and unsustainable economic practices. There is much more that I could say about the lack of a strong economic strategy to improve the outlook for, and opportunities of, the people of Scotland. People do not want the next year to be dominated by the referendum. They are crying out for action now, not in 12 months or even later. It is time for the SNP Administration to take Scotland off pause, get its eye back on the ball and start using the powers that it has to improve the quality of life for Scots. It is a Government and its job is to govern, not to campaign.

Given that the economy is now in a very different place from where it was in 2007, does the member not agree that this is the time for a review of the enterprise agencies?

Scotland’s enterprise agencies are a vital tool in helping Scotland to meet the economic challenges that we face. They are integral to the creation of a sustainable economy that fosters innovation and investment. I welcome the publication of the “Evaluation of Scottish Enterprise Engagement with Account Managed Companies”, but the report was commissioned by Scottish Enterprise and is fairly self-congratulatory. As Jenny Marra said, Scottish Enterprise has not been independently reviewed since 2007. I support calls for such a review. If the agency was scrutinised by, for example, the Public Audit Committee, we could establish how well it is performing in delivering the Scottish Government’s economic strategy. It says in the report that the account management model that the enterprise agencies use is effective, provides value for money and should remain largely unchanged. As the minister said, 80 per cent of people who took part in the telephone survey are not confident that they would be able to source comparable support from anywhere other than Scottish Enterprise. An issue that SMEs raise time and again, which was raised in this morning’s meeting of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, is access to finance. As it says in the report, “It has been increasingly difficult for many companies to obtain bank loans and/or overdraft facilities to manage cash flow issues or facilitate growth.” In the area that I represent, Sercon Support Services Ltd is a successful, award-winning small business—indeed, it is used by Scottish Enterprise as a model of best practice. Members might expect such a company to be able to get funding to expand, but Sercon struggled to find further investment funding. It is worrying that such a strong company, which has Scottish Enterprise’s support and put forward a robust business case, was rejected by funders. We must ask how many smaller, less well-established companies are being rejected. We need to do more to ensure that support is on hand for small and medium-sized businesses, which are finding it hard to secure funding from banks as a result of stricter lending criteria or simply because banks are risk adverse. Banks need to be clearer about the sectors that they will support and what they are looking for in business plans. I am pleased to say that Sercon eventually secured funding. However, the company had to go through a protracted process, with many disappointments along the way. The Scottish Government and the enterprise agencies need to do more to support businesses when they apply to banks for loans, particularly if the business provides a direct economic benefit to the area, as Sercon does, by safeguarding and creating employment opportunities. Perhaps the minister will say today what the Scottish Government and Scottish Enterprise are doing to address such issues and whether it is possible to extend the lending portfolio of enterprises agencies, to ensure that companies, especially start-up and smaller businesses, can access much-needed finance so that they can grow or become better established. It is not just financial support that SMEs need but advice on managerial issues, accountancy and a broad spectrum of other issues. There is also a need to focus on areas of high unemployment such as North Ayrshire, which, according to Scottish Enterprise’s statistics from April 2012 to March 2013, had only two companies—out of 268 in Scotland—that were considered to have growth prospects. Will more support be considered for areas that are economic black spots? That said, according to the report, from 2008-09 to 2011-12 the account management model has contributed £1.11 billion of additional economic value to the Scottish economy and Scottish Enterprise has—as the minister stated earlier—created and/or safeguarded 15,130 jobs. We just need to ensure that that support is better targeted, perhaps towards women and minority groups and towards SMEs rather than higher growth companies. In my area, I have seen the direct benefit of an enterprise agency’s work to safeguard jobs. Highlands and Islands Enterprise has played an integral part in stopping the closure of the university marine biological station at Millport by working with the Field Studies Council, North Ayrshire Council, Cumbrae Community Development Company and the wider community to secure its future. There is no doubt that the closure of the marine station would have devastated the local economy, with the loss of 30 quality jobs and up to £2 million removed from the local economy. Although there is some evidence that Scottish Enterprise is supporting the economy, there remain questions on whether it could perform better, particularly in respect of support to small and start-up businesses as well as in areas of direct economic need. I support the Labour amendment.

7. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports GP practices. (S4O-02348)

The focus on reducing the pressures that are placed on hospitals has moved certain responsibilities, including responsibility for programmes such as detect cancer early, to primary care. Doctors’ practices are expected to handle pre-op care and reduce the prevalence of unscheduled care demands at accident and emergency units, and they have seen an increase in demand for appointments as a result of demographic shifts and because of the pressures of recent changes in benefit qualifications. What steps is the Government taking to ensure that primary care is properly resourced and does not become the poor relation of the national health service?

I congratulate Graeme Pearson on bringing to the chamber this important debate on enhancing enterprise for Scotland and China. Unfortunately, I have not been to China, but it is on my list of places to go. As the motion states, “China is currently the second largest economy in the world”. It is therefore vital that Scotland strives to foster relationships with China, and this debate is an excellent opportunity to highlight the economic importance of such a relationship. Graeme Pearson set up the cross-party group to promote relations between Scotland and China, which works with organisations and authorities to increase cultural educational and economic exchange between the two countries, and highlights the barriers that exist in developing those links. To address the four major barriers that have been identified by the CPG, we need to have direct flights from Scotland to China, as has been mentioned many times in the debate; improved trade; educational links and language opportunities; and improved visa and immigration procedures. I welcome the Scottish Government’s recognition, in an answer to a parliamentary question by Mr Pearson earlier this session, of the importance of direct flights. Establishing such a link will be invaluable not only for business and the establishment of successful trade links but for tourism. It should be a key priority, which should be of economic benefit to both China and Scotland. Perhaps the minister will update us today on what progress has been made on that. We also need to ensure that it is easier for Chinese businesses to be established here. The CPG has identified as a hindrance to the setting up of such business ventures the cost of visas and their processing time, which also affects visitor numbers to Scotland. I know that such matters are reserved, but I wonder what discussions the Scottish Government has had with its UK counterparts to tackle those barriers so that Chinese businesses can invest in Scotland, and vice versa. In the meantime, Scottish Development International needs to continue working closely with Chinese investment companies and entrepreneurs to build relationships and to outline why Scotland is an attractive investment opportunity and why such relationships can be beneficial to both countries. To further improve trade links, we need a multifaceted approach, focusing on improving the teaching of Mandarin and Cantonese and our understanding of Chinese culture through education, school twinning and cultural exchange. It is deeply important that we do everything that we can to foster not only economic links between Scotland and China but cultural links. I welcome the Scottish Government’s five-year strategy for engagement between Scotland and the People’s Republic of China, but I hope that we can see the strategy extended to encompass longer-term outcomes and goals. Again, I thank Graeme Pearson for bringing the motion to the chamber today and I thank the CPG for its work in bringing our two nations closer together. As we help to open up China, we can play an important role in reducing China’s human rights issues.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with stakeholders regarding improving the transport links between West Scotland and the rest of the country. (S4O-02315)

I am sure that the minister is aware of the potential Glasgow crossrail project, which, while always suggested, has never been started. The project would link more than 220 stations across Scotland. In particular, it would connect the high-unemployment area of North Ayrshire and its islands to greater Glasgow, Edinburgh and everywhere in between and beyond, by a direct rail link. All that it would take to establish a basic crossrail route is the electrification of an already existing 1.8 miles of track across the centre of Glasgow, opening up huge employment and economic opportunities across the country—

The question is this: when will the Scottish Government give serious consideration to the crossrail project and add it to the infrastructure programme?

I have to say that until now I have enjoyed the history lesson that has been part of the debate. It is right that we celebrate all that has been achieved in generating hydroelectricity in Scotland, but there is scope to do much more. Hydro power is a potentially abundant source of power that is underutilised in Scotland. I am sure that all members are aware that Scotland has quite a bit of wet weather. Combined with our mountainous landscape and easy access to the sea, that means that, with sufficient investment, Scotland can be the ideal location for the further development of hydro power. It is time to take steps to encourage the use of that underutilised resource. That is especially true in light of the fact that, for the second time running, Scotland has missed the carbon emissions targets set by the Scottish Government. To ensure that that does not happen again, I expect the Scottish Government to stop making excuses and to make the most of what is on our doorstep by doing its utmost to harness hydro power.

No. I will not turn around and blame the UK Government; there are things that we can do in Scotland. Supplying 100 per cent of Scotland’s energy from renewable energy sources by 2020 is an ambitious target that we are on track to meet. Staying on track will require hard work and support from communities and businesses, as well as the Scottish Government. Pursuing the 2020 target vigorously is important because of the benefits not only to the environment but to families across Scotland who are suffering from fuel poverty and unfairness in our energy market. That is especially true of small-scale community projects. Community ownership of renewables can bring economic benefits to an area as well as boost local support and commitment to renewable energy initiatives. Therefore, I am pleased to note that the motion appreciates the benefit of enabling local ownership of at least 500MW of renewable energy by 2020. I would like more to be done to maximise the number of identified potential sites for hydro power plants that come to fruition. The example of the Welsh Labour Government shows that, when communities are brought into planning and decision making and are given a say in the development of renewables projects in their area, hydro power projects can thrive and benefit the community through reinvestment in community projects of the income that those schemes generate. However, I sound a note of caution about community ownership. I welcome the community benefits of renewables, but there are times when more rigorous controls should be exerted over large energy businesses, to ensure that they do not attempt to bully communities into supporting extensions of renewables projects. I have come across one example of that in my region in relation to a wind energy project. A wind farm company used the relationship that it had built with local people—through providing grants to local areas and schools—to coerce families into supporting an increase in turbine planning applications. That emphasises the importance of ensuring that community schemes truly have community benefit, as well as environmental benefit, at their heart. Importantly, the Scottish Government has said: “Locational charging means Scottish generators produce about 12% of UK generation but account for 40% of the transmission costs, or about £100 million per year more than generators in the South.” In considering the Scottish Government report “Low Carbon Scotland: Meeting our Emissions Reduction Targets 2013-2027: The Draft Second Report on Proposals and Policies” at the beginning of the year, the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, of which I am a member, expressed frustration about grid delays and problems with hydro power’s connection to the grid on Scottish islands. The situation clearly damages the viability of small-scale hydro power projects. The Scottish Government could commit to doing more to promote connection to the grid across the country, which would allow for better and more widespread development of hydro power. In 2011, hydro power stations produced 5,331.8GWh of electricity, which was 10.4 per cent of the total electricity generated in Scotland—51,223GWh. The report “Scottish Hydropower Resource Study” states: “The total financially viable resource in Scotland was found to be 657 MW installed capacity, the output of which would be 2.98 TWh of electricity per year.”

Perhaps I can explain that as I go on. I fully appreciate that the Scottish Government is not solely responsible for the implementation of new hydro power stations, but it is more than happy to welcome new investments in all the renewable energy sectors. The minister talked about extensions, but enthusiasm is lacking. The Scottish Government could use its powers to put in place a strategy to aid in the delivery of hydro power projects in identified potential sites. If the Government is serious about making Scotland a true world leader not only in setting targets but in delivering them, it needs to up its game, ditch the rhetoric and commit to radical action on hydro power.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate, given the national significance of next year’s Commonwealth games. I see this as the perfect time to highlight the great work done in my region by North Ayrshire Council, which, under previous Labour administrations, put in place many programmes and initiatives that have benefited individuals across the local area. North Ayrshire Council, KA Leisure and NHS Ayrshire and Arran have placed an emphasis on jointly providing opportunities for everybody in North Ayrshire to be active, involved and inspired. With more than 50 sporting clubs in North Ayrshire, it was worrying that, in 2008, the local authority held a worse-than-average position in relation to 38 of the 61 indicators of the health and wellbeing profile. In 2010, KA Leisure launched the fit for the future strategy to meet the national outcomes in the national performance framework. More importantly, the strategy aims to tackle health inequalities, especially given that the estimated cost of physical inactivity in Scotland for 2010-11 was £94.1 million. That money would be better spent on early intervention, as prevention is better than any medicine. I call on the Government to ensure that it is taking steps to support future generations into success in youth sport, the legacies of the Olympic and 2014 Commonwealth games, and the legacy that can be provided if Glasgow is successful in winning its bid for the 2018 youth games. However, there has to be more than a legacy for Glasgow; the Government must take steps to ensure that the legacy can be enjoyed across Scotland. We must ensure that my constituents who live only 40 minutes from Glasgow can benefit from the governmental spending that Glasgow will get. What legacy arrangements has the Government put in place for other areas to ensure that the benefits extend far beyond the location of the games? In 2012, I noted that the sports minister announced the funding for a national sports centre, with an investment of £25 million. I was delighted to support my Labour colleagues on the council with plans to place a bid for a football academy to be established in Largs at the existing Inverclyde sports centre, especially given its links with world-renowned football managers such as Sir Alex Ferguson and José Mourinho. However, it seems that the Government’s change in the criteria from a football academy to a national performance centre means that Largs is no longer a contender, even though officials in North Ayrshire Council had begun to prepare a bid. It seems that the real reason why the council was dissuaded from placing a bid is that the decision had been taken out of its hands by the continual moving of the goalposts—if members will excuse the pun—in altering the criteria.

Yes, but it would have been useful if that had been clear in the criteria from the outset. The three sites that are now being considered for the academy—in Edinburgh, Dundee and Stirling—are all on the east coast or are central. As much as I welcome the investment for any future sporting heroes whom we may produce, it is disappointing that the project will join a long list of sporting investments lost to the west of Scotland. I am honoured to represent an area that has many successful junior teams and clubs that are run by the hard work of thousands of dedicated volunteers. I am delighted when I hear of their sporting successes and when they have been successful in gaining Big Lottery Fund funding, but I know that it is a constant struggle for those clubs to remain solvent, despite their hard work and dedication. The continuation of those clubs and the opportunities that they provide for young people across the region often depends on the capacity of their members to complete funding applications. Perhaps the minister can give some thought to providing support to help people to complete funding applications. It is true that many well-established organisations, such Kilwinning Community Sports Club and the Evolution Skatepark in Stevenston, have become social enterprises to try to become self-sufficient, but they are still largely reliant on grants to update and enhance their facilities for members. I call on the Government to consider putting more support into aiding the viability of local clubs that provide sporting opportunities and inspiration to our young people every day, particularly in areas where there are clear health inequalities, such as North Ayrshire. We need to ensure that grass-roots sport funding is both constant and available, because to truly ensure a future legacy there needs to be real and long-term investment in everyday sporting opportunities. I look forward to the publication of the youth sport strategy in September this year.

I apologise for my late arrival and for missing part of the opening speech. An inquiry into underemployment in Scotland was urgently needed, and I am pleased that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee undertook that work. I will focus on two issues: the rise of zero-hours contracts and skills underemployment. I will talk briefly about the effect of both those factors on women in the labour market. The committee took a lot of evidence from individuals who had been employed on zero-hours contracts and heard that such contracts can have a negative impact on those who are employed under them. Zero-hours contracts, whereby employees are not contracted to work for any fixed number of hours or for any hours at all, are a vehicle by which hard-won labour rights are being revoked for vulnerable groups of workers, particularly women and young people. Those who are employed on such contracts receive no holiday or sick pay and their job is extremely insecure. If they are benefit claimants, the way in which they claim can be negatively affected, often attracting unfair sanctions, as has happened to some of my constituents. Such insecurity and unpredictability often mean that the individual is underemployed for a significant period of time, as people can find it difficult to attend job interviews or training courses if they do not know when they will be called to go to work and cannot afford to turn down that work when it comes. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth, John Swinney, stated that “the Government does not apply zero hours employee contracts” when taking on employees. However, the committee heard evidence that such contracts are applied by some companies and organisations that are in receipt of public funding. For example, 27 per cent of staff at the University of Edinburgh are on zero-hours contracts. In a letter to the committee, John Swinney argued that, although the Government does not approve of such contracts, “It is the responsibility of companies contracted by the Scottish Government to provide public services to put in place appropriate contractual arrangements with their employees.” That is not good enough.

I think that there are things that we can do in this Parliament to bring about change. The Scottish Government must use its substantial influence to ensure that the incidence of zero-hours contracts is minimised if it is serious about ensuring a fair labour market that protects the rights of the low paid and vulnerable. Zero-hours contracts not only turn back the clock on rights to sick, holiday and parental leave but reinforce gender imbalance in the labour market. In evidence to the committee, Women’s Enterprise Scotland identified a gendered dimension to the problem of zero-hours contracts, as that abusive practice disproportionately affects jobs in which women are more commonly employed than men. In the private care sector, a reported 41 per cent of the workforce is employed under such contracts. That severely hampers women’s capacity to become financially stable and productive employees, because even something as basic as planning and paying for childcare can become very problematic. I call on the Scottish Government to explore how it can act quickly and decisively to help women who are struggling to maintain a place in the labour market as a result of exploitative zero-hours contracts. I urge all cabinet ministers to recognise that, although zero-hours contracts can be appropriate in some cases, the vast majority of the evidence that the committee heard during its inquiry made it plain that such contracts unfairly benefit employers. I turn to skills-based underemployment in Scotland. I believe that a situation in which skilled graduates and others feel compelled to take jobs that do not align with the skills that they possess does a disservice to the Scottish economy as well as to the individuals affected. The UK Commission for Employment and Skills noted in its evidence to the committee that “a jobs market that is engaging many experienced people to do entry level jobs is blocking access to jobs for young people.” The commission observed that that leads to “a range of social problems and lack of aspiration amongst some young people”. Those social problems include an increase in welfare dependency, a greater demand for benefits advice and a higher incidence of mental health and wellbeing issues.

We did not look at that as part of our inquiry, but perhaps the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth or the Minister for Youth Employment could respond to that in their winding-up speech. The lack of opportunity for underemployed people to maintain and develop their skills in jobs that align with their ability has the potential to become disastrous for an entire generation of graduates and apprentices. It is important that the Scottish Government recognises the need better to match access to education and skills development to career prospects in order to boost employability and to tackle the imbalance in the labour market. The committee recommends that the Scottish Government collects trend data on skills utilisation in Scotland, taking particular account of the gender split. We need to tackle the rise of zero-hours contracts—perhaps through the forthcoming procurement bill, as has been mentioned—especially in organisations that are publicly funded. On skills underutilisation, the Scottish Government should—as John Mason noted in his intervention on Gavin Brown—undertake meaningful action to align the highly skilled and educated workforce that we produce with the employment opportunities in Scotland.

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will introduce a group B streptococcus screening programme for pregnant women. (S4O-02192)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the tragic case of baby Lola Young from Kilwinning, who died after Crosshouse hospital failed to pick up the fact that she had a group B streptococcus infection? It is estimated that, in the United Kingdom, 340 babies will develop early-onset GBS infection each year, and one in 10 will die. I hear what the cabinet secretary says with regard to the fact that the decision has been taken and the issue will be kept under review. However, routine testing for streptococcus B is carried out in America and Australia.

Given that a test costs approximately £15, will the cabinet secretary at least consider whether NHS Scotland should offer the option of a test to pregnant women, to ensure that no other family has to endure the loss of their baby from streptococcus B? Will the cabinet secretary meet me and the baby’s parents to discuss the matter?

I am pleased to be able to debate this important issue, and I congratulate the Equal Opportunities Committee on an excellent and comprehensive report. Homelessness is unacceptable at any age, but it is particularly harmful for those who are starting out in adult life, as it sets them up for problems for years to come. A range of social ills such as crime, mental ill health and addictions can be avoided or treated more effectively if a young, vulnerable person is supported into a home and helped to retain it. I agree with the Equal Opportunities Committee’s finding that preventative measures such as mediation, respite accommodation and education are vital to tackling youth homelessness and homelessness more generally. For example, in the area that I represent—North Ayrshire—the council uses a range of effective prevention measures, in line with the holistic housing options approach, and has found that, in the four years since its prevention strategy was put in place, homeless presentations are down by 49 per cent. Members will note from the committee’s report that North Ayrshire Council has had excellent results from mediation between family members and young people at risk of homelessness because of family relationship breakdowns. That allows the young person a safe route back into the home. For those who are not at risk of violence, that is the best possible solution until they can enter their own tenancy in a planned and well-managed way. However, during mediation, it might not be possible for a young person to stay in the family home. That means that respite accommodation can be a vital tool in the prevention process. Giving evidence to the committee, Quarriers acknowledged the great importance of respite accommodation. The committee rightly observed that that aspect did not appear to be well integrated into the mediation process and said that not enough evidence on respite had been given to the inquiry. I welcome the minister’s comments today but ask that she explore the importance of respite accommodation further. I expect her to give a full-throated commitment today to ensuring that the issue is given proper consideration in any Scottish Government action on youth homelessness. Of the most concern to me was the committee’s finding that, all too often—as the convener said—young people leaving care are discharged into homelessness. A system that allows that to happen with any regularity is a system that is failing.

GIRFEC should result in our getting it right for every child, but there is still a lot to be done to prevent homelessness among young people. More must be done to protect vulnerable young people leaving care. Their often complex needs mean that they are high-risk candidates for losing a tenancy, and they require a holistic and consistent support system. To that end, I fully support the committee’s recommendation that the Scottish Government take action to ensure that appropriate aftercare is put in place across the board, and there should be a review of where the system is failing. I would like the report to have explored in greater depth the involvement of the voluntary sector in helping young people to get and keep a home. For those young people who enter a tenancy and are neither financially nor emotionally prepared, voluntary organisations can provide targeted and alternative forms of support that can bolster existing local authority services. That might answer Linda Fabiani’s point about practical help for young people. Involving the voluntary sector might also be a good way of integrating young people into their neighbourhoods, teaching them new skills and making them more employable. I therefore urge the minister to focus on co-ordinating with housing options hubs to ensure that the voluntary sector is involved and valued, not only in the process of resolving homelessness when it occurs but in the prevention of housing crises among young people. The costs of tenancy failure are huge, not only to the taxpayer but to young people who are made homeless. Becoming homeless as a result of a lost tenancy can irreparably damage a person’s life, and the impact on our society is huge. We must do everything that we can to co-ordinate a consistent national response that incorporates the Equal Opportunities Committee’s recommendations into a meaningful and wide-ranging strategy to ensure that young people are supported into homes in a safe, planned and sustainable way.

I am pleased that the Labour Party has brought this debate on ferry services to Parliament today. The timing could not have been better, given the recent and worrying proposals by CalMac Ferries to cut port staff’s wages by up to 25 per cent. The issue is of great concern to employees, which is why I will focus on it in my speech. CalMac’s outline proposals to cut the terms and conditions of employment of clerical staff, as stated in our motion, would see their hours remaining the same or increasing while most premiums would be scrapped, which would in effect bring about a pay cut of up to 25 per cent. Although CalMac is offering a buyout, that would offer protection and mitigate the cuts for only 18 months. We are talking not about the highest-paid staff, but about some of the lowest-paid staff in the company. There seems to be no logic to why clerks are being targeted. The Transport Salaried Staffs’ Association estimates that more than 70 per cent of clerks are women, many of whom are currently the main breadwinners in their households. I, too, attended the event that has been mentioned by other members so that I could hear how the cuts would affect the staff and their families. One woman said that she stands to lose up to £600 a month. She is the main wage earner in her family and they are already struggling financially. If her pay is cut, she will not be able to afford to pay the bills or the mortgage. Another employee spoke about how he stands to lose the equivalent of his annual mortgage payment. Many of the staff live in areas where there are no alternative jobs available. Those are the same staff who, in 2012-13, helped CalMac to achieve technical reliability and punctuality levels of almost 100 per cent and 100 per cent in customer service efficiency, but who are being rewarded with pay cuts. Does CalMac still expect to achieve those levels if it undervalues the staff who meet and greet its passengers?

I thank the minister for that intervention, which probably throws my whole speech out. Nevertheless, I will continue with some of it. Many staff have to stay on if a ferry is delayed, and they do so willingly to ensure that passengers reach their destinations, but it seems that CalMac has no regard for that commitment and dedication. There seems also to be no economic or business case for the cuts. The company made a pre-tax profit of £4.1 million in the financial year 2012-13 and paid back £5.8 million to the Scottish Government through the clawback mechanism. Staff do not want to strike, but they currently feel that it is the only option left to them. The minister says in the motion that he supports both the union and the employer, but CalMac is part of David MacBrayne Ltd of which the Scottish Government is the sole shareholder. I take into account what the minister has said, but I ask him to intervene and to meet both sides to ensure that a solution is found quickly so that the future and finances of the valuable employees are secured, so that they can be assured that they will not face these outrageous, life-changing and demoralising pay cuts, and so that ferry services are not disrupted.

I thank the Presiding Officer and members from all parties for their support in bringing this debate on the future of the marine biological station at Millport to the chamber. I also thank all the staff employed at the station, who currently face an uncertain future, the academics from the scientific field, and members of the Cumbrae Community Development Company, many of whom have joined us in the public gallery, for their support. I know that they have had a long journey to get here. I thank all members who are going to participate in the debate. The facility that is based on the isle of Cumbrae has been used for more than 100 years, and it has been a crucial part of a network of research stations around the British and European coasts. In the past 30 years, it has become a leading teaching facility. It brings thousands of students, not just from Scotland and the UK but from all over the world, to Millport. The facility belongs to the University of London. On 20 March 2013, the governing board of trustees decided to close the university marine biological station in December this year, following the withdrawal of £400,000 a year of revenue funding from the Higher Education Funding Council for England. This is not just an English problem, however. The station may be a University of London asset but, if it closes, the education of marine biology scientists will be affected for years to come, and the closure will have a devastating effect on a Scottish island community. That is why we need to do everything we possibly can to save the station. Situated in the Firth of Clyde, the marine station at Millport is a unique and valuable resource, and I am pleased that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Michael Russell, now agrees with me on that. Professionals who have worked both at the Scottish Association for Marine Science in Oban and at the Millport station have told me that Millport offers a rich variety of conveniently accessible habitats within walking distance, something that the SAMS facility at Oban does not offer. One such person, Dr Peter Barnett, who has been an honorary senior research associate at the station for the past 21 years, has joined us in the public gallery. There is no doubt that the abundance and variety of marine life on the sea bed is invaluable to the students for their field studies. The station also has an 80-bed hostel for students on the site, and it owns research boats and seawater species tanks. Those are facilities that SAMS in Oban is not able to replicate. That is why there has been tremendous support, with more than 13,000 signatories from around the world calling for the station to be kept open. I should also mention that the station has a rather quaint museum and an aquarium, which are enjoyed by tourists on the island. The station has been used by the University of Glasgow, the University of Edinburgh, the University of St Andrews, Edinburgh Napier University, Heriot-Watt University and the University of the West of Scotland. In 2012, 533 students from Scottish universities and 521 students from English universities used the facility, which is contrary to the claim by the First Minister that it is not used by any Scottish universities. Unfortunately, despite the recognition for the station, none of the Scottish universities has come forward with a lifeline. I ask the cabinet secretary what discussions the Government has had with Scottish universities about the possible acquisition of the facility. As regards the damage done to the local economy, it would be a travesty for such a small island, with a population of approximately 1,200, to lose 30 high-quality jobs—that is the equivalent of 4,000 jobs being lost on the mainland—and up to £2 million from the local economy. If those 30 families move off the island to find employment elsewhere, it will not only impact on local businesses; it will affect the viability of the local school and other public services. The impact will be much more than the loss of a marine research facility; the consequences for the island will be far reaching. North Ayrshire Council, working with Highlands and Islands Enterprise, has commissioned an analysis of the commercial development potential of the facility, which is due to be completed by the end of June. I hope that that will produce a viable business plan to attract interested parties to invest the £10 million capital and revenue funding that is required to provide a sustainable operational structure, perhaps with a teaching facility and a commercial aspect, to secure the long-term future of the station. I am not sure that the Scottish Government truly understands what the loss of the station could mean for the island and beyond. It is disconcerting that, at a public meeting in Millport on the marine station’s future that was held by Labour MP Katy Clark and attended by around 100 people on a wet and miserable evening last week, the Scottish National Party councillor Alan Hill said that he believed that this debate would make no difference. Does he have no faith in the Scottish Government? I am happy to work with anyone—political or otherwise—to find a viable solution, because this is not about politics, and it is not just about saving the marine station; it is about saving the fragile economy of an island in the already disadvantaged area of North Ayrshire. I hear that community ownership of the facility is being considered, although I have not been privy to the detail. Will the cabinet secretary expand on that proposal and say whether he supports the idea? To conclude, I ask the cabinet secretary to give assurances that his Government is 100 per cent committed to finding a way to secure a long-term sustainable future, including an element of financial support if necessary, for the marine station and the community of Cumbrae. I urge everyone to come together on the issue for education, for science and for Scotland, so that we unite in doing everything that we possibly can to keep the marine station open and the island’s economy afloat.

As a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, I am pleased to participate in the debate. An integrated UK energy market is the best way for Scotland to achieve a low-carbon and good-value energy mix for consumers. Electricity market reform is long overdue, so the EMR is an excellent opportunity to redress the power imbalance between consumers and suppliers, as well as to boost investor confidence in renewables technology. However, the opportunity has been missed to address the need to reduce electricity demand, to improve access to community ownership of renewables and to boost competition in the market more generally. All those measures are necessary if Scotland means to maintain an energy infrastructure that is not only low carbon but which is low cost, widely accessible and fair. It is imperative that, in working together to deliver reform, the Scottish and UK Governments commit to building confidence, participation and understanding on the part of consumers, as well as to making a meaningful effort to reduce household energy bills in real terms. One way of doing that would be to promote competition in the energy market, which would force energy companies to innovate and diversify. The UK and Scottish Governments have made it clear that they want to encourage greater competition. Reduction of the hegemony of the six major energy companies has the potential to make electricity more affordable for people who are in fuel poverty. By allowing small local enterprises to enter the market, we can enable communities to benefit from energy that is generated locally. However, the provisions in the Energy Bill may unintentionally damage its potential to achieve that stated aim. The bill requires independent energy generators to secure long-term viable power-purchase agreements before they receive funding from banks. In reality, only the six major energy companies have the financial strength and stability to enter into a viable power-purchase agreement with independent generators, and the financial incentive to do so has been removed as the EMR does away with renewables obligation certificates. Therefore, very few independent generators will be able to secure PPAs and, as a result, many will not have the financial capacity to invest and grow, which will threaten their future and narrow the field of competition in the energy market. Although the bill provides for a reduction in the barriers to entry to the market that are normally presented by PPAs, I believe that its provisions do not go far enough to protect and promote independent generators. On contracts for difference, although I welcome the Scottish Government’s involvement in delivering that incentive for companies to invest in low-carbon generation, I urge the minister to give careful consideration to, and to act to mitigate, the negative impact that such contracts might have on community schemes. Community schemes are a fantastic way for consumers who are vulnerable to fuel poverty to engage in the market, and they often result in fairer, cheaper and more transparent tariffs. However, uptake has been low and the ROCs were an ineffective incentive. EMR represents an opportunity to boost uptake and to invest in what is widely considered to be a positive alternative to the supply of energy to communities exclusively by the big six energy companies. In its pre-legislative scrutiny of the Energy Bill, the House of Commons Energy and Climate Change Committee noted that the bill is likely to damage the prospect of community enterprises and that contracts for difference would not allow community schemes to thrive. Again, by damaging the ability of community ownership of renewables to grow and spread across Scotland, the bill has the potential to consolidate the domination of the big six energy firms, thereby weakening competition in the market and the UK’s ability to diversify and promote a low-carbon energy mix that is fair on consumers. I urge the Scottish Government to address that inadequacy as it designs the delivery of contracts for difference, and to take action to boost community schemes in Scotland by ensuring that they are as straightforward as possible, and by eradicating the potential financial uncertainty and complexity of contracts for difference for community enterprises. l believe that the main beneficiaries of any reform of the electricity market should be consumers. I do not believe that that will be true under the reforms as they stand and, as such, although I welcome electricity market reform in principle, I believe that the unambitious proposals that we are considering are a missed opportunity. More can and must be done.

As convener of the cross-party group on volunteering and the voluntary sector, I thank Gavin Brown for bringing the debate to the chamber. Just last week, the cross-party group heard from Handicabs, which is an annually funded, Lothian-based community transport charity. The difference that being funded over three years would make to it is that it would have security of business and hence, of course, security for service users. The third sector does a tremendous job in tackling the problems that we face in Scotland compassionately and effectively under huge financial pressure. I am sure that all members would join me in expressing gratitude to all those who work and volunteer in that sector. The Scottish and UK Governments appear to take advantage of charitable organisations in Scotland, as they are cutting more and more public services and expecting—indeed, encouraging—the third sector to extend itself further into vital public service delivery with insecure and inadequate budgets. As the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has pointed out, the debate is not about giving charities more funding, although a halt to the reductions seen in Government spending on the third sector last year would be welcome, but about giving organisations certainty over how much funding they will get and when they will get it, which allows them to plan and deliver services securely, invest in their staff and communities and build projects that service users can rely on when they need them most. Despite the joint statement on the relationship at local level between Government and the third sector, many third sector organisations are trapped in a yearly cycle of making funding applications. That not only undermines staff morale and increases turnover but reduces the time and scarce resources that are spent on reaching out to those in need and developing the organisation. Clearly, we need a renewed commitment from local authorities that they will endeavour to increase spending commitments to a three-year cycle or more, in accordance with their agreement under the joint statement. The reality is that, due to a roll-back of public sector services, third sector organisations provide a lifeline to many communities in Scotland that they simply could not do without. It is incumbent on us all to ensure that, when organisations are threatened because of financial uncertainty, the Scottish and UK Governments act quickly and decisively to ensure their survival and their service users’ wellbeing. Therefore, I support the motion in calling for the Scottish Government to carry out a review of how common the application of a three-year approach to funding is across Scotland, to pinpoint where inconsistencies exist and use that information to draw up guidelines for local authorities, and in strongly encouraging a three-year approach to funding and therefore going some way to allowing for financial certainty across the board in Scotland for third sector organisations.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it has taken to help tenants and social landlords affected by the so-called bedroom tax. (S4O-01947)

Although the Scottish Government is providing some funding to advice agencies to help tenants who are affected by the bedroom tax and universal credit, other measures are available to it that could also be of help. In the short term, it could provide a separate fund to councils to top up the discretionary housing payment so that they can help tenants to bridge the gap caused by the bedroom tax. It could also fund credit unions to advertise the benefits of budget accounts—or jam-jar accounts, as they have become known—and boost their uptake or to provide incentives to help people open such accounts. In the longer term, given the low levels of housing stock that are available, will the Scottish Government take the sensible step of increasing the funds that are available for the construction of social housing as a more permanent solution to the problems that social landlords and tenants face?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. Instead of following the example of the Government, distorting figures to make an argument for separation, I will take the time that has been allocated to me to encourage the Government to consider the resources that we should be investing in to secure a stable future. The people of Scotland deserve to know that there can be more stability in their future—stability that cannot be guaranteed by the changeable value of our oil reserves. Our future depends on utilising our greatest resource: the people of Scotland. If the SNP Government was not so distracted by separation, it would see the importance of investing in colleges instead of cutting their budget by £35 million and it would invest in real apprenticeship schemes instead of spinning rhetoric. If it had invested the autumn statement capital consequentials in housing at a level of £330 million over two years, it could have provided a boost to the jobs market and stimulated the economy at the same time—not to mention helping to provide homes for the 45,322 people who were registered homeless in Scotland in 2010-11. Given the most recent employment statistics, which revealed that female unemployment has gone up by 8,000 in the last quarter, the Government should be focusing on investment and training opportunities and on reversing the cuts to colleges, which so disproportionately affect women. Although I welcome the rise in employment in general, it is not good enough to overlook the negative points in the most recent unemployment figures, especially when North Ayrshire, which I represent, has a 6.8 per cent unemployment rate, which is the highest in Scotland, whereas that of Aberdeenshire is only 1.2 per cent, which is the lowest in Scotland. That is not only bad news for my constituents; it paints a broader picture of an SNP Government that is reliant on jobs in the oil and gas industry to boost levels of employment in one part of the country while it refuses to invest in further education and skills training in other parts. That inequality must stop. How can we hope to secure our future without investing in the future working generations of the country? But no: instead of decisively leading Scotland out of recession by training and educating the future workforce, the SNP Government is busy manipulating facts and figures to suit its arguments on separation.

We have heard enough figures being bandied back and forward today, and I am not going to add to that. The SNP claims that we would be viably set up as an independent country 18 months after the referendum.

That is at the same time—2016—as when the CPPR says that our oil revenues will fall and Scotland will become the worst-off place in the UK. We heard only yesterday that the Office for Budget Responsibility has predicted Scotland’s oil and gas revenues to have fallen by 40 per cent in 2012-13 compared with the previous year. That is not to mention that, two weeks ago, in leaked Cabinet papers, the finance secretary admitted: “We will need to be mindful that these pressures could reduce the resources available to provide additional public services”. Why not take that private reticence on the viability of an economy built on oil reserves to the public? It is time to stop the focus on volatile and uncertain sources of revenue and instead value our workforce as a foundation for the economy that we can rely on. Leading economist and Nobel prize winner Professor Stiglitz informed the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee that “if an economy is growing ... on the basis of natural resources that are being depleted, that raises a question about whether it is sustainable.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 27 February 2013; c 2606.] The only way in which to secure the sustainability of Scotland’s economy is not to base it on oil, but to invest in skills and education.

We need more investment in further education; a boost to capital expenditure programmes, which will create jobs; and better funding for childcare to allow greater numbers of women to get into work—that is what the Government should focus on in the here and now. The UK Government spends more per head in Scotland than it spends anywhere else in the UK, so instead of speculating on what might be, we should make the most of that spend to build a highly skilled, highly educated and highly productive workforce. We have to step away from the spin and political manoeuvring displayed by the SNP in this debate and, instead, push for real investment in what should be a prosperous and sustainable future for Scotland.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what the impact of the housing benefit changes in April 2013 will be on the number of homeless people in Scotland. (S4O-01882)

Has the Scottish Government considered utilising its powers to amend section 16 of the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 to allow rent arrears accrued as a result of the bedroom tax to be treated as ordinary debt in law instead of as contributing to rent arrears? That would help prevent increased numbers of eviction proceedings and prevent people from being evicted because of bedroom tax arrears. That option has been proposed by Govan Law Centre and is supported by Shelter Scotland, Money Advice Scotland and Oxfam. If the Scottish Government is not supportive of that option or is unwilling to introduce the amendment, what are its plans using its current powers to limit the damage that will be done to 100,000 Scots who will be directly—

—worse off and 40,000 who are likely to face rent arrears?

I speak as a former member of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee. I was present for most of the bill inquiry, but unfortunately I left before the scrutiny was concluded. During the inquiry, I took part in a committee visit to Aberdeenshire to the upper Dee riparian scheme to look at salmon fisheries issues and then went on to the Usan Salmon Fisheries in Montrose. I thank the people who were involved in facilitating those visits, because I found them incredibly useful and much more informative on the practical issues that are facing aquaculture fisheries than sitting round a committee table. Environmentally, we need to promote sustainable fishing and tackle the effects of climate change. While at the upper Dee riparian scheme, we saw proactive attempts to mitigate the effects of climate change such as using tree cover to lower water temperatures to enable salmon spawning, which has already been mentioned. It was hard to believe that while we stood shivering on the banks of the Dee, salmon were under threat of losing their spawning ground if the water temperature increased by another degree. I recommend that the Scottish Government looks at the methods that are being used by the Dee scheme to mitigate climate change as part of its review into wild fisheries. At Montrose we heard about the challenges that are experienced by the netsmen in keeping to close times because of bad weather and other circumstances. Although adherence with close times is important for conservation and stocking reasons, account must be taken of the operational issues that are faced by netsmen. It was suggested to the committee that current close times should be replaced with a designated days-at-sea allowance. However, I concur with the committee’s conclusion that that would not be an acceptable solution, due to the difficulties that it would pose. The issue is due to be included in the Scottish Government’s forthcoming review of wild fisheries management, which is a welcome development. The Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Bill is designed to make changes to the law on fish farming and shellfish farming, including new requirements for freshwater fishers, changes to the law on sea fishers and shellfish waters and the ability to introduce fixed-penalty notices for certain offences in aquaculture fisheries, to name but a few. It is vital to ensure that the bill is not only fit for purpose right now but fit for purpose as we move into the future. Since the Aquaculture and Fisheries (Scotland) Act 2007 was passed, progress has been slow and work is still required. I agree with the committee report in stating that it is disappointing that we have needed primary legislation so soon after that act. We must ensure that the new bill is robust, sustainable and fit for purpose. There are still a number of reviews to be carried out, and I ask why they were not all included in the bill. We need a bill that will promote sustainable aquaculture and wild fisheries, economically and environmentally, in the long term, given how important those industries are to Scotland. The aquaculture industry is looking to grow by 32 per cent by 2020, which is about 4 per cent each year. In evidence, Steve Bracken, of Marine Harvest, said: “salmon farming and wild fisheries are both vital industries for the coast and inland parts of Scotland. I am absolutely sure that we can go on and become bigger and better in both areas.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 5 December 2012; c 1466.] We need to ensure that the bill supports that growth. Sustainable fishing faces many challenges, not least the threat to fish stocks from predators such as seals. I believe that the committee’s conclusion that seals should be shot to protect fish farm stocks only as a last resort is correct. It is important that non-lethal alternatives such as netting and other equipment such as audio seal scarers should be used, provided that they are as humane as possible and do not harm other species. I am pleased to hear that the minister has informed the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee that work continues to be done to find further options for seal management. I support the bill at stage 1, but I want it to be more robust so that it not only promotes economic and environmental growth but brings Scotland’s aquaculture and fisheries sector into the 21st century, making the sector sustainable in the long term.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what protection there is for young children in cases where allegations of sexual abuse have been made but no evidence has been found. (S4O-01822)

As the minister knows, some young children do not respond well to interview and, for one reason or another, a physical examination is not carried out. Then, despite a family member still having concerns for the child’s wellbeing, no further investigation is carried out by the police or social services, because they say that there is no evidence to prove that abuse is occurring. In such cases—where, in effect, the cycle of abuse is being allowed to continue—what steps will the Government take to ensure that the child comes first and his or her rights are protected? At present, it seems that, until the child can articulate what has been happening, there is no case to answer and the child continues to be at risk of abuse.

I was not a member of the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee when it held its inquiry and produced its subsequent report on the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets, but I look forward to participating in the debate today. While reading the report, it struck me that, though they are ambitious, Scotland’s renewable energy targets are achievable. However, numerous issues need to be addressed, because there is little point in setting ambitious targets and not taking the steps required to meet them. If the targets are to be met, we need to ensure that we have the proper courses in place to deliver people with the right skills sets. Worryingly, a lot of the evidence in the report seems to suggest that we are falling short on that. Although I recognise that the Government is working in partnership with the industry and educators, it seems that something is being lost in translation. For example, in evidence to the committee, Rob Moore from the National Skills Academy for Power stated: “We have the potential to reach the targets, but it will take a lot of work. If we do not do things differently, we will not meet them.” Linda Greig from Carnegie College said: “we will not meet the targets, because we are not taking into account that people are leaving and the fact that we have a workforce that is skewed over the age of 35.”—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 28 March 2012; c 1251.] Robin MacLaren from the Institution of Engineering expressed concerns over the availability of skills and the fact that we are operating in a global market. It seems that something is going wrong in our ability to attract young people—particularly young women—into the sector. I agree with the committee that we need to work with colleges, sector skills councils and employers to equip people with the right skills and to deliver hands-on, intensive, accelerated training schemes. However, I fear that that might not be achievable due to colleges already being overstretched and having had their budgets slashed once again. The other point that I wish to raise is community engagement. Interaction with communities and developers generally comes from onshore wind farm developments in rural areas. In North Ayrshire, currently three sites operate, according to the register of community benefits from renewables, and they have all supported local groups, local schools and the larger community through community benefit payments. However, I hear that in some cases those sums of money come with conditions attached. For example, if a local group receives funding, it has to make an agreed number of appearances a year on behalf of the site—in other words, it has to promote the wind farm. What is more worrying, as noted in some of the written evidence, is that those benefits seem to undermine the planning process and are used by the developers to build favour. In North Ayrshire recently, we saw exactly that happen when a community wind farm submitted a planning application to extend its site. The wind farm has made contributions to two primary schools in Dalry. They are grateful for that; however, the children’s school bags were used to deliver a draft letter in support of the wind farm planning application. It was fully prepared and even addressed to the North Ayrshire Council planning officer so that all the parent had to do was sign it and send it off. The council has said that whether to distribute the letters was at the head teacher’s discretion and the schools justified it as being part of an eco-course and a “Getting involved in your community” project that the children were doing. Does the minister agree that it is inappropriate to use children in that way, under the guise of environmental education? That is not to mention the conflict of interest for the school, given that it is part of the local authority that will decide on the planning application. I am supportive of community benefits in principle, which, as the committee report notes, can stabilise fragile communities, provide and promote energy efficiency, thereby reducing energy bills, and help to promote renewable energy developments, which in turn will help us to achieve our targets. However, we need to make sure that those benefits are not then used as a form of bribe to get local support for planning applications. As the committee report says, community engagement should be a two-way street and developers should have to adopt a code of practice. We need better connectivity with the industry and educational bodies to provide the right skills courses to attract more young people, particularly women, into the sector. Although I certainly do not want to see community benefits removed, they do seem to create problems with the planning process, so we need more clarity on that. I ask the minister to develop robust new guidelines so that incidents such as the one that I mentioned in North Ayrshire do not happen again.

Under current regulations, the debt arrangement scheme allows money that is owed to payday lenders to be included in a debt payment programme along with priority debts such as mortgage or rent arrears and energy bills. That is a good idea in principle, as it allows the person to pay off the debt in line with their disposable income, and the fact that any creditors must abide by the legislation offers the debtor some protection. Short-term payday loans can, independent of any other debts, cripple a person’s finances. In many cases, people take out another loan to pay off the interest on the first, and then they find it necessary to enter the debt arrangement scheme. However, that highlights a key issue with the DAS. As the cabinet secretary said, the setting-up process can take months. It involves finding an approved money adviser, agreeing pay-backs, the approval of a debt payment programme and its entering on to the DAS register, all of which take time. While that is happening, the interest on the payday loan is accruing, which puts the person deeper in debt. Currently, the average time to pay off debts under the DAS is eight years and five months. During that time, the person’s credit rating is destroyed. In other words, they are blacklisted. It is therefore vital for the debts to be paid off as quickly as possible so that the debtor can return to financial normality. I therefore welcome the minister’s announcement today on the freezing of interest at the point when the person applies for a debt payment programme. Irresponsible lending has a contaminating effect not only on the lives of debtors but on the viability of the DAS and on those creditors who take their responsibilities seriously, yet up to now the Scottish Government has consistently refused to take action on payday loans, arguing that the way in which to tackle the problem is through the consumer credit legislation. Although greater regulation is needed, the Scottish Government has the power to act, if it wants to, on the particular issue of payday loans as part of the DAS. It could do more to warn people of the dangers of high-interest lending such as payday loans through its social advertising fund and money advice networks. It should not be left to the Daily Record to warn people, although I welcome its leaflet today. The Government could also provide more support to credit unions so that they can offer affordable and accessible alternatives such as loan guarantee funds. The Govan Law Centre has proposed that a separate, fast-track DAS be set up exclusively for payday loans in order to prevent the devaluation of what is a sensible scheme and a vital lifeline to those who are trapped in a debilitating cycle of debt. Such a scheme would be a viable option allowing people to pay off payday loans within two years, rather than their taking eight years to pay off what is supposed to be a short-term loan solution. High-interest and rollover charges could be suspended and then written off following a successful repayment of the debt. In that way, payday loans could be effectively tackled within the context of the DAS. I urge the minister at least to consider that proposal. The Scottish Government has the powers to advise people against using payday loans and to support credit unions as a reliable alternative. It should use those powers now. I also urge the minister to consider the Govan Law Centre proposal.

I am privileged to speak from the Labour Party benches on this issue. We have a history of supporting children and families: we increased child benefit, introduced child tax credits and have fought against the current child benefit reforms every step of the way. The Tories and Lib Dems in Westminster have the wrong priorities. They are cutting taxes for millionaires and big business while slashing welfare benefits such as housing benefit and child benefit, which is an outright attack on the most needy in our society and will plunge more children into poverty. The changes that are being put in place by the coalition Government mean that more than 100,000 families in Scotland could each lose up to £1,200 a year. It is neither fair nor equitable that people who earn more than £150,000 are getting a tax cut while single-earner families on £50,000 are getting their child benefit cut. Of course, equality is not something with which the Eton boys are familiar. How can it be right that a couple who each earn £49,000 a year can still access full child benefit whereas a family whose single income is £60,000 a year will get none? The Institute of Economic Affairs has called this child benefit change: “the single most incompetent change to the benefits system since the second world war”. I agree that it is deeply unfair and unjust. In the test of fairness and even from an administrative standpoint, the child benefit reform is a complete shambles. The coalition needs to look at how child benefit is paid. Save the Children believes that child benefit should be paid to the main carer or second earner in a couple family, which is usually the mother. That gives at least some comfort that the money will go towards the wellbeing of the child and avoid the difficulties that arise in a relationship where there is domestic abuse or where the partner does not provide adequately for children. I hear the Scottish Government calling for more economic levers. In response to that I ask what it would do with them. It has the power now to change things, but what is it doing? For example, it was announced last year that the amount of free childcare will increase by 125 hours to 600 hours. I welcome that development, but it was announced first in 2007 and then again in 2012. When female unemployment was rising year on year, up to the 23 per cent rise between 2010 and 2011, why was action not taken? It was viable for the Government to do so, but action was delayed, so I ask the Government when those will changes come into play. They could be of real benefit in supporting children and families and reducing child poverty. We need to look at ways in which we can change the culture so that childcare goes from being expensive and inflexible to being accessible for working-parent families countrywide. That is a difficult task, but one that we must address. Many local authorities are considering closure of after-school clubs and breakfast clubs because of budget constraints. Those vital services are often the only way that working mothers can afford to work. Although council budgets are a decision for councils to make, their cuts are a direct result of Government policies, which are not supporting children and families. As I said at the beginning of my speech, we in the Labour Party have a proud record in Government of supporting children and families. I make no excuse for repeating from our amendment the quotation from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation report that has been mentioned so many times this afternoon. Perhaps the SNP will listen to what it is saying. “With the political debate dominated by the referendum on independence, it’s important to point out that the issues that are central to tackling poverty, such as health, childcare, schools and housing fall within current legislative powers of the Scottish Government. The problems highlighted in this report cannot wait; action can and should be taken now.” When it comes to supporting families, we need clear direction and action from this Government. We have to move away from the soundbites and come up with practical solutions right now to protect those who are being hit by the cuts, and to tackle the real inequalities in Scotland. We need to start using the powers that we have today to protect the most vulnerable, to support children and families and to ensure that our children get the best possible start in life. They should not be used as a political football to score points against the coalition in Westminster. Labour will in this chamber continue to speak out against the Tory-Lib Dem cuts, and our Westminster colleagues will fight to get them reversed. They are fighting not just for a fairer Scotland but for a fairer United Kingdom. After all, the problems are ideological, not geographical.

I will focus on housing, as the housing budget has been hit harder than any other. The overall housing budget has gone from £1.3 billion in 2010-12 to £770 million in 2013-15, which means that house building will fall from 22,205 units to 18,000. No one can argue with the fact that that is a significant cut, and yet housing is expected to generate about £3 billion of economic activity and support up to 8,000 jobs each year, directly and indirectly, across the Scottish economy. Much more could be done if the whole £331 million in capital spend that is available through the autumn statement consequentials was put into the housing budget in the next two years. That would do more to stimulate the economy and to move thousands of people into employment.

That should be paid through the Scottish Futures Trust. [Interruption.] I will not be lectured on housing by certain SNP members. In the statement that John Swinney made today, his response to the Finance Committee on housing was a total of eight lines. That is how much the SNP thinks about housing. The affordable housing supply budget faces a considerable cut. It is going from £235.5 million to £196.2 million, which is a total cut of £39.3 million, even when we take into account the additional £50 million Barnett formula money that was announced just before Christmas. According to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee report to the Finance Committee, “The cut in housing capital is larger than the overall cut to capital spend in Scotland in the current review period”.

I am sorry, but I have taken one intervention and do not have time to take another. Although the draft budget goes a little way to improving the situation, the cuts to housing still remain higher than average. The budget could also be devastating to housing associations, which are already struggling to fund new projects due to the cuts to the current housing association grant from £70,000 to £40,000 a unit. Many housing associations have argued that that level of HAG funding is unsustainable. It is all very well to say, as Alex Neil did last year, that housing associations should spend their reserves, but they can do that only once. I agree with the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee, which called on the Scottish Government to review the HAG level and set out alternatives so that housing associations do not fall below planned development levels, which would jeopardise their sustainability. According to the Scottish Federation of Housing Associations, small housing associations or those in rural areas simply cannot afford to develop with the lower grant levels. It is more costly to build in rural areas, and the cost of loans is more expensive for smaller associations because lenders are less willing to lend or the rates are prohibitive. That means that, in the vast majority of cases, development just stops, which leads in turn to a shortfall in housing stock in the areas that need it most. With councils being cash strapped, cuts being made to HAG and lenders being risk averse, it is hard to see how we will achieve affordable housing building targets. However, according to Government figures, in the first year of the affordable housing programme, the target of 6,000 was exceeded by 800. That could be because the data is being presented differently. Shelter notes: “overall the number of starts has fallen from 4,800 in 2010-11 to 3,366 in 2011-12. Given the lag time in all that, I think that we are heading for a cliff edge with regard to new completions in the next few years.” We need to be confident that we have the exact figures, so we need more transparency in the way that the figures and the associated data are collected, counted and presented. We need sufficient breakdowns of starts, completions and their timings to ensure that there is no double counting. I could say much more on the travesty of cutting the housing budget so severely. We need a housing budget that is more sustainable, will stimulate the economy through the construction industry and will provide much-needed apprenticeships for young people, for which the industry is crying out. We need to review HAG funding so that housing associations can build homes for those who are most in need where they are needed. We need to build houses, particularly to address the mismatch of housing that councils and housing associations face. We need to extend the retrofit programme to make houses more efficient and reduce fuel poverty. This budget, which cuts the housing budget by higher than average, will not do that.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s debate on biodiversity. Biodiversity measures the health of ecosystems, which are in effect the foundations for all life on earth. It is therefore extremely important to maintain and vary our biodiversity to promote growth in ecosystems and maintain stability. According to Scottish Environment LINK’s briefing, the “continued loss” of biodiversity “has been called ‘Europe’s silent crisis’”, and it certainly is a crisis. The International Union for Conservation of Nature, for example, has estimated that one out of eight bird species could face extinction, as could one out of four mammals; that 75 per cent of the genetic diversity of agricultural crops has been lost; and that more than 350 million people suffer from severe water scarcity. Those effects are not, of course, all the effects of losing biodiversity; they are just a few varied examples to highlight the type of problems that we will face if we allow the situation to continue. The Scottish biodiversity list, which was published in October 2012, lists 160 species that are at risk of extinction. Those species range from plants, mammals, insects and fish to birds. Further, the progress report for the period 2008 to 2010 on “Scotland’s Biodiversity: It’s in Your Hands” identified 15 targets in respect of which there is room for improvement or which have been missed, out a total of 37 targets that are based on the European biodiversity action plan framework. The report also notes that, although progress has been made on certain key indicators, “progress towards meeting Scotland’s biodiversity targets demonstrate that biodiversity loss has not yet been halted and will require renewed and sustained effort over a longer period.” That said, the United Kingdom Government is also failing to meet its biodiversity targets. Therefore, we all need to do more to ensure that we protect and promote our natural environment both on land and in the sea. That is one reason why we need to ensure that the marine station at Millport stays open. I welcome the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s examination of the analysis of the responses to the Scottish Government’s consultation on the 2020 challenge for Scotland’s biodiversity and its consideration of how we will ensure that we meet the Aichi biodiversity targets and highlight the issue of biodiversity while providing practical initiatives so that people at home can play their part and work towards a more sustainable Scotland. However, we need to lead from the front and ensure that protecting, maintaining and raising the awareness of biodiversity get the policy platform that they deserve. I hope that the Government can rise to that challenge against a backdrop of global inaction. It has already been said that we need to promote partnership to protect biodiversity. North Ayrshire Council, South Ayrshire Council and East Ayrshire Council, for example, have developed an Ayrshire local biodiversity action plan, which serves to ensure that those three local authorities will work towards the same goals while tackling issues that would be impossible for any one local authority to deal with. There is no quick fix, but through education, partnership and strong leadership, we can start to reverse the destruction of our ecosystems. North Ayrshire Council and many other local authorities now have eco-schools, and have incorporated into the curriculum teaching about the importance of the environment. I hope that, in time, that will provide the necessary step change that is needed to raise awareness of the issue. Eglinton park in North Ayrshire is an invaluable resource to have on our doorstep. A number of biodiversity projects operate in the park area, and the rangers and the countryside liaison officer also have considerable input into the eco-schools, grounds for learning and John Muir awards projects. That educational remit is also carried into the local community. There is work with youth and community groups, and guided walks and illustrated talks are used to strengthen the message. Such practical examples reveal that work is being done to protect and show the importance of biodiversity. They also get local communities involved, which gives them the sense of responsibility that we need to instil in the public. Where possible, the same approach should be adopted in other areas, and there should be work with those responsible for local parks and green areas so that they engage with the local community and help to increase awareness. It seems that no one is fully pulling their weight on biodiversity issues so far. I would like to see stronger leadership from the Government on the issue. Crucially, we also need to work with local authorities to develop programmes at the grass-roots level so that people do not feel disconnected from the issue. Our environment is all around us, and we all have a part to play in protecting and maintaining it.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. This morning, before a meeting for stakeholders about the possible closure of the marine biological station at Millport, petitioners presented to the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, Mike Russell, a 10,000-strong petition. That petition was for the Scottish Government—it was addressed to Alex Salmond and presented to Mike Russell—and highlights the importance of the marine biological station to students across the United Kingdom. [Interruption.]

I am merely asking for advice, Presiding Officer. [Interruption.]

The petition asked the Scottish Government to work with others in education and industry, and with statutory bodies to ensure that the Millport marine station remains open. I met afterwards some of the stakeholders who were in attendance at the meeting, and they were, quite frankly, shocked that Mike Russell handed the petition to the University of London representative at the meeting. The petition was addressed to—

The petition was addressed to the First Minister, Alex Salmond, but Mike Russell passed it to an outside body. [Interruption.]

I ask the Presiding Officer to confirm whether Mike Russell’s action was acceptable parliamentary conduct. [Interruption.]

If it was not acceptable parliamentary conduct, what does the Presiding Officer advise should be done? [Interruption.]

Does the cabinet secretary agree that what the Millport marine station offers students is unique, because it provides in a compact and ideal location the diverse range of marine environments that is required for the study of marine ecology? I understand that the Scottish Government has invested heavily in the marine station at the Scottish Association for Marine Science at Oban. Does he agree that the facility in Millport should also be protected, because of the diverse environment that it provides for students?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. On 20 December, in response to a question that Kenneth Gibson asked about the closure of the marine field station at Millport on Cumbrae, the First Minister said: “the station ... is not actually used by any Scottish university at present, although the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council contributes some funding to it.”—[Official Report, 20 December 2012; c 15033.] Following that statement, I have had several emails from numerous academics at Scottish universities who use the station—most notably, Professor Harry Birkbeck, who has worked in marine biology since 1972 and still volunteers at the station. He pointed out that the University of Glasgow, the University of Edinburgh, the University of St Andrews, Edinburgh Napier University, Heriot-Watt University and the University of the West of Scotland have all used the station and are still doing so. In fact, 533 Scottish university students and 521 English university students used it last year. [Interruption.]

I checked the Official Report this morning to see whether the First Minister’s statement had been corrected, but it has not been. I believe that the First Minister made the statement in good faith and was simply misinformed. Will he correct the Official Report to reflect the fact that the station is used by Scottish institutions for research and training?

Kenneth Gibson has not invited me to come along to that jobs fair.

I congratulate Jayne Baxter on her excellent maiden speech, and I look forward to many more of her speeches. The most recent statistics show that youth employment in Scotland is falling. If we exclude those in full-time education, we find that 21.6 per cent of 18 to 24-year-olds are unemployed and, as Angela Constance has pointed out, “The percentage of young people in the workforce in the public and private sectors has been falling since 2005”.—[Official Report, Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, 19 December 2012; c 2288.] Both nationally and locally, female youth unemployment is worse than male unemployment. It becomes a much more complex issue when we take into account young women with children, because they have to find not only a job but affordable childcare, which can be extremely difficult if the only jobs on offer are part-time or involve working unsociable hours. In North Ayrshire, one in eight young people face little chance of finding employment. Youth unemployment has doubled in the past five years from 6.5 to 12.6 per cent, and it shows no sign of improving. That means that North Ayrshire is the second fastest rising youth unemployment hotspot in the UK. Many of those young people feel that they have nothing to aspire to and nothing to look forward to. We must remember that behind every statistic there is a human being who is struggling to get by and, if we are not careful, many could fall through the cracks. North Ayrshire Council welcomed the one-off £800,000 payment from the Scottish Government last year to help to address youth unemployment, but with the scale of unemployment in the area there is a need for such support to occur regularly. Last year I attended an event at the Playz in Pennyburn, Kilwinning, where I spoke to numerous young people and heard about their experiences of looking for work in the area and the struggles that they faced. All those young people were actively looking for work but were unable to find quality jobs. Many were suffering from underemployment and had to resort to part-time and temporary work just to get into the labour market. In some cases, they were overqualified but felt that such work was the only option that they had left. Underemployment is a serious problem in Scotland, particularly among young men. In Scotland, 10.95 per cent of the population are underemployed, so I am pleased that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee is undertaking an inquiry to explore the impact of underemployment on the economy and on the people concerned. We will hear the results of that inquiry in due course. North Ayrshire’s most recent area profile states: “the proportion of school leavers going into full time higher and further education is much higher at 68.7% in North Ayrshire than for Scotland as a whole (62.9%).” Although that is welcome, it is also a reflection on the available alternatives that exist for young people, many of whom would rather go into work. Worryingly for young people, a 24 per cent real-terms cut in college places between 2011 and 2015 means that opportunities in further education are reducing. We need to develop an approach that not only encourages young people to go into education but ensures that there are quality jobs and apprenticeships out there when they want to join the labour market. I welcome the current investment in apprenticeships, but more needs to be done. The CITB-ConstructionSkills briefing states that the industry is crying out for skilled young people, argues that the industry is facing a “retirement timebomb” and notes that only 12 per cent of construction workers are under 24. The Scottish Government needs to do more to get young people into trades, and yet the industry’s recovery is being threatened by further cuts to the Scottish housing budget.

The schools have a part to play in that, as do colleges. We are all working together on the issue, so it should involve a partnership. I was concerned to read in a recent Skills Development Scotland paper that some modern apprenticeships are only of six or nine months’ duration. It seems that a modern apprenticeship in accountancy lasts for only nine months. How can that be right? I have been given examples of young people who are apprenticing in call centres under the guise of an administration apprenticeship. They are supported by a wage subsidy when in fact all that they are doing is making or taking phone calls. Does the Government really consider such a job to be a quality apprenticeship? I am sure that we all have examples of young people who are being exploited by employers who are backfilling posts under the pretext of modern apprenticeships. I look forward to the publication of the Government’s report on the number of young people who have a positive destination after completing one of those modern apprenticeships—or are modern apprenticeships simply an exercise to reduce the unemployment statistics? In tackling youth employment, we need to provide more training opportunities by encouraging more employers to take on young people, and we need to provide more college places rather than reduce them. We need to ensure that they are quality jobs and genuine training places that give young people the skills to fulfil their potential and the future that they deserve.

6. To ask the Scottish Government how changes to nomenclature of units for territorial statistics—NUTS for short—boundaries will affect European structural fund allocations. (S4O-01654)

As the cabinet secretary will be aware, the review of the NUTS boundaries closes tomorrow. One of the proposed changes would, for European Union administrative purposes, see the islands of Arran and the Cumbraes moved out of the Highlands and Islands and placed within North Ayrshire. Does the Scottish Government support that move, or does the minister agree that that would be detrimental for those islands, because it would separate them from all the other Scottish islands and impact on their structural funding in the long term?

Last week, the climate change talks in Doha came to a close, with 194 countries agreeing to implement a second phase of the Kyoto protocol from 2013 to 2020. I congratulate the minister on his role in the talks. The talks should have led to an historic agreement to tackle climate change, but many organisations argue that they fell short of what was needed. Tasneem Essop, head of low-carbon frameworks at WWF, said afterwards: “These talks have failed the climate and they have failed developing nations ... The Doha decision has delivered no real cuts in emissions, it has delivered no concrete finance, and it has not delivered on equity.” Stop Climate Chaos Scotland called the outcome of the talks disappointing and said that it fails to deliver the cuts to carbon emissions that are needed and does not commit enough money to helping the poorest countries to adapt to climate change. However, I welcome the climate justice fund, which will provide £1 million per year for the next three years to support water projects in Malawi and Zambia, thus increasing communities’ resilience to the impact of climate change. The fund will go a little way towards tackling issues that developing countries face as a result of climate change. It is such countries that will be hit the hardest if we do not tackle the issue effectively now. As well as the destruction of landscape and ecosystems, there will be a high social and human cost from climate change. As the minister has said, that is why we need the whole world to play its part in tackling climate change. There is a suggestion that in some major developed countries there is no political will to tackle climate change. We are already seeing the effects of that. Christian Aid Scotland estimated in 2011 that just a 2°C rise in average temperature by 2050 would lead to 250 million more people being forced to leave their homes, while 30 million people would go hungry and a further 3 billion would suffer water shortages. We need to ensure that Scotland has a robust climate change policy. We are not off to a good start, having missed the first annual emissions reduction target. What remedial action is the Scottish Government taking to compensate for missing that target? According to reports, we are likely to miss nearly every legally binding target from 2014 onwards. What is the Scottish Government doing to ensure that that does not happen? It is all very well to set ambitious targets, but we have to be prepared to take positive action to meet them. For example, as several members have mentioned, the roads budget has risen by 40 per cent in the past five years, while the funds available for investment in sustainable transport have remained flat. This does not seem like a Government that is serious about tackling climate change. We should be investing in alternative means of transport and encouraging individuals either to take the bus or train or to car share. Locally, we need to do more to ensure that councils are meeting their recycling targets, given that more than half of councils missed the 40 per cent target in 2010. Our actions must match up to our words. While some sacrifices may need to be made now—our budgets need to reflect that—it will save our world resources in the long term. There is no quick fix to climate change, but time is running out and we must commit for the long term and develop a realistic climate change policy for the future. We must also have the political will and commitment to make that change happen.

I pay tribute to all the fishermen who go to sea and risk their lives to bring us high-quality fresh fish every day. We should do all that we can to protect their livelihoods. I now have some understanding of how difficult the EU’s fisheries negotiations can be and how vital the outcome is to our fisheries industry and all the associated businesses and communities on land. It is therefore essential that we get the best possible deal for Scotland. As has been said, the main issues of concern for the Scottish Government are the mackerel dispute, which has been a long-running problem, and the reduction in the quotas of total allowable catch for cod. Everyone is aware of the mackerel dispute, which is about the overfishing of mackerel stock by Iceland and the Faroes and which has led to a proposed decrease in the total allowable catch for Scottish fishermen. The irresponsible and unsustainable fishing methods of Iceland and the Faroes have led the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea to suggest a 15 per cent reduction in the total allowable catch for mackerel. Mackerel is Scotland’s most profitable fish. In 2011, its value to the Scottish economy was £164 million, which far exceeds the value of any other type of fish. Therefore, any cut in the total allowable catch would have a negative effect not only on the Scottish fishing economy, but on Scotland’s overall economy. The fact is that the problem is not caused by Scotland, yet we are suffering because of the actions of other countries, which is not acceptable. Negotiators need to engage with Iceland and the Faroes and come up with a solution to the mackerel dispute, because if both those countries continue to overfish the mackerel stock, that will result in serious problems for the long-term sustainability of our fishing fleets. I note the proposed sanctions, but I hope that they will not be needed and that they will encourage negotiations through which all the countries that are involved can sign up to a deal. The problem is a long-running one, but I hope that, this time round, we can come up with a solution that all parties will be able to agree to and maintain. As highlighted in last week’s ministerial statement on the issue, the proposed 20 per cent cut to the total allowable catch for cod will affect fishermen’s livelihoods and will be counterproductive because of the likely increase in discards. Thanks to good fisheries management, the cod population is increasing, so cutting the total allowable catch will mean that more cod will be discarded, and everyone agrees that discards are wasteful and uneconomic. In his statement last week, the cabinet secretary said: “Imposing a 20 per cent quota cut is simply a recipe for massive discards. Our fishers will not be able to avoid catching ever more plentiful cod, for which they will have no quota, and they will once again be forced to dump dead fish back in the sea.”—[Official Report, 4 December 2012; c 14219.] We in the Labour Party agree that we cannot achieve a long-term sustainable future for the marine environment, the species within it and the people who depend on those species if the practice of discards continues. How can we be expected to meet a full discard ban on cod by 2018 if the total allowable catch is cut by 20 per cent? Many fish species tend to swim together, so it is difficult to catch only one type of fish. I therefore hope that the planned reduction will be reconsidered. We need to push for decentralised decision making with a degree of flexibility to make it work effectively. If the policy is devolved, it would allow coastal states to develop their own solutions to issues, while allowing key stakeholders and those who have local expertise to come to the forefront and manage their fishing industry effectively and sustainably. Keeping in mind the fact that fish do not recognise borders, we can all agree that decentralised decision making and the process of regionalisation within fishing policy is the way forward. It is clear to me that a one-size-fits-nobody policy has damaged our fisheries industries and fishermen’s livelihoods by failing to work in EU markets. It has also damaged our environment by failing to create sustainable fisheries and leading to high levels of overfishing and discards. Although we all understand the need for centralised targets and quotas to protect our fish stocks, we cannot assume that what works in one EU state will work for all countries. There are times when countries need to work together towards a common goal such as solving the mackerel dispute, but it is recognised that there must be a level of flexibility to allow those who have local knowledge to make their own decisions as long as they promote sustainability. I close with a quotation from the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation: “There is a pile of priorities that need to be addressed urgently—the number of days that vessels can put to sea, sanctions for Iceland and Faroes for overfishing mackerel, and a common sense approach to discarding”. I am pleased to hear that the cabinet secretary recognises that those issues all need to be addressed as a matter of urgency, because the power struggle between the various European institutions over who has supremacy in making decisions about fishery management is damaging the long-term future of our fishing industry.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what new responsibilities are outlined in the Water Resources (Scotland) Bill for Scottish Water relating to sewage treatment plants. (S4O-01577)

How will the new legislation address issues with private sewage treatment plants, such as the plant at Burnhouse near Beith, which serves around six houses and a caravan park of 40 caravans? That sewage plant was the responsibility of a private company—the North Ayrshire Water Company Ltd—which has now gone into liquidation. I have previously written to the cabinet secretary, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Scottish Water, and no one seems to have responsibility for the plant, but if it breaks down, the residents will have to bear the huge repair and legal action costs. Does the cabinet secretary think that it is right that residents, many of whom are elderly, have to take responsibility for the plant? What advice can she offer the residents? Would she be willing to meet them to discuss their concerns?

I apologise for arriving late in the chamber and missing the cabinet secretary’s opening statement. Will the cabinet secretary elaborate on how receptive other member states have been in his talks with them about flexibility on the cod quota, as a 20 per cent cut would seriously affect the livelihoods of our fishermen and, undoubtedly, increase discards, despite our discard-free quota scheme?

I also thank Jamie Hepburn for bringing this very important debate to the chamber and highlighting the work of White Ribbon Scotland. Domestic abuse can and does affect far too many women in Scotland, and yet so many suffer in silence. Today, we send a clear message that there is no place for domestic abuse. For two days last week, white ribbon campaigners held a roadshow in the Rivergate mall in Irvine to promote the 16 days of action. That was only one of the many events that are taking place in North Ayrshire. Irvine Rugby Club showed its support for the campaign before its game, and the majority of football clubs in North Ayrshire have also signed up to it. During the next two weeks, there will be a workshop at Garnock academy, displays of women authors at all North Ayrshire libraries, and a screening of an animation that was produced by local school pupils with support from North Ayrshire Women’s Aid. The aim is to get young people, particularly young men, engaged with the campaign while shedding light on the problem of domestic abuse. Worryingly, during 2011 almost 2,000 incidents of domestic abuse were reported in North Ayrshire, which makes it one of the worst areas in the west of Scotland. It is hoped that those figures will be reduced this year because of the preventative work that is being undertaken by the domestic abuse task force and a range of initiatives working with White Ribbon Scotland and other organisations. Strathclyde Police is targeting offenders and delivering a programme of education that, it hopes, will change attitudes, alter behaviour, and break the cycle of domestic violence in our area. Young people who see domestic abuse when they are growing up think that it is normal and they sadly go on to be abusers. That is why the white ribbon campaign is so important in its reaching out to young men and boys, showing them role models that set good examples, and letting them know that violence against women is not acceptable in any situation. We also need to make sure that there is support for the women who come forward. Third Force News recently reported that two out of three women who come to refuge accommodation are being turned away and that funding at ground level is becoming increasingly stretched for the services that face high demand. Given that a report of domestic abuse is made every 10 minutes in Scotland, we cannot afford for those services to be underfunded; otherwise, in all likelihood, women will not feel safe enough to come forward. Progress has been made, but domestic abuse is still far too common in Scotland. We need to break the cycle by educating children, raising awareness and promoting key services. I congratulate the work of White Ribbon Scotland, because we must rid Scotland of domestic abuse and let offenders know that it will not be tolerated.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the Scottish Government debate on St Andrew’s day, although a Scottish Government celebration of St Andrew’s day might be more appropriate than a debate. I am sorry to disagree with Ms Goldie. St Andrew’s day should be a celebration of Scottish culture and tradition and a way for us to highlight that culture and tradition to the rest of the world, and to generate trade and tourism. Scotland has such a rich and vibrant history that we should all be proud to be Scottish and to share our traditions with the rest of the world. Scotland has many things to share, from the Loch Ness monster to the elusive wild haggis, which frolics around steep mountains and hillsides, but only ever in one direction—the true “Great chieftain o’ the pudding-race”. Members might ask, if it is so elusive, how am I aware of its habitat? That evidence comes from a study in 2007 of the haggii and the stories of the many thousands of tourists who have come in search of the creatures. Leaving aside the unique Scottish wildlife for now, my region has a vibrant history and many unique Scottish businesses. Ayrshire is, of course, the home of Robert Burns. There is a museum dedicated to his life in Irvine, where he lived for a time in 1781. It is said that Burns came to Irvine as a farmer but left as a poet. Just down the road in Alloway is the Robert Burns birthplace museum. The Irvine Burns club, which was opened in 1862, has a huge range of artefacts and one of Scotland’s most significant Burns treasure troves; I recommend that everyone who has an interest in Burns visit the centre to see the incredible array of Burns memorabilia. Irvine also has the annual Marymass festival, which is organised by the Irvine Carters Society and North Ayrshire Council. The society dates back to the 11th century, when Irvine was the main port for Glasgow and men transported goods by cart to the city. The festival itself, which dates from the middle ages and arose from Mary Queen of Scots’s visit to the town in 1563, is a focal point for the town and attracts visitors from far and wide. Every August, many Irvinites return home to experience the fair’s rich pageantry and the week-long festivities. The festival not only promotes Irvine and contributes to the local economy, but brings thousands of people into Scotland. Meanwhile, across the water in Arran, we have the famous Isle of Arran Cheese Shop and Arran Aromatics. I challenge anyone who goes to Arran not to come back with something from one of those shops or—if it is more members’ thing—something from the Arran Whisky distillery, which is one of the few remaining independent distilleries in Scotland. Arran, which is a beautiful island in itself and attracts visitors from across the world, is known as “Scotland in miniature”. Many people who come to the island take a piece of it home through those businesses and many others; indeed, many of those businesses have extended their reach not only in Scotland but throughout Europe, Asia and the Americas. At a recent Ayrshire Chamber of Commerce and Industry event on exporting that I attended, the owners of Arran Aromatics and the Isle of Arran Cheese Shop said that they used to export to the mainland, which was Ayrshire, and then extended their exports to the middle east—or Edinburgh. Now they export to the far east, including Dubai and China. We in this Parliament have a duty to encourage Scottish businesses, culture and tradition to thrive not only throughout the world, but within Scotland itself. I find it strange that one of the biggest celebrations of Scotland is tartan week, which takes place in Manhattan every year and is one of the largest outdoor Scottish events. Although it is great for promoting Scotland abroad, I have to ask why we do not have a similar co-ordinated event in Scotland on St Andrew’s day to promote our culture, history and businesses. Everyone in Scotland should be able to celebrate St Andrew’s day. When I was a civil servant, we were delighted to be given the day off as a public holiday; however, most of us used the day to make a start on the Christmas shopping, with barely a thought given to St Andrew. Like any public holiday, it comes with a cost. If local authorities and the national health service gave all staff the day off, they would still need people to provide essential services, and those people would have to be paid additional-hours payments. With ever-decreasing resources, public services simply cannot afford such funding. As the Labour amendment states, “Scotland’s national day and flag belong to all of the people of Scotland regardless of origin, current residence and political beliefs”. Everyone has a part to play in promoting Scotland. Not just one party but all of us in the chamber have Scotland’s interests at heart, and we all need to work together to ensure that we promote Scotland and St Andrew’s day.

Will the Government consider looking into the current barriers to community engagement and access to funding in relation to renewable energy? Specifically, in relation to the Kelburn wind farm in North Ayrshire, the communities of the Garnock valley are excluded from access to funding despite being located close to the wind farm.

Given the high incidence of domestic abuse in North Ayrshire, the 7 per cent rise in domestic abuse incidents, the fact that “Third Force News” reports that two in three women are being turned away from refuges, and the fact that 30 per cent of domestic abuse charities are finding a funding deficit in 2011-12, what additional resources can the Scottish Government offer those vital services so that women who experience domestic abuse get the support that they need?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this important debate during adoption week. During my time as a councillor in North Ayrshire, I sat on the adoption panel, so I know first hand how challenging and complex the process can be at local level. With that in mind, I will focus first on the issues that North Ayrshire Council is experiencing and the trends that it is witnessing before I go on to touch on kinship care. In North Ayrshire in 2010-11, there was a significant increase in children who were approved for adoption or permanent fostering. Although only four were matched in 2009, 17 were matched in 2010, and 12 were matched in 2011. There was a similar increase in children who have been matched permanently with foster carers, with matches rising from three in 2010 to 10 in 2011. There are many reasons that lead to a child being put up for adoption, and the children come from a variety of backgrounds and circumstances. However, North Ayrshire Council notes that there has been a worrying trend in the number of children who have become looked after and accommodated due to parental substance misuse and the subsequent neglect to which that can lead. It is therefore clear that the issues of adoption and permanence cannot stand alone. Our strategies need a multifaceted approach that not only makes the adoption process seamless and stress free for the child, but tackles the deep-seated issues that have led to a child being in that situation in the first place. The issue is not unique to North Ayrshire—adoption services all over Scotland are struggling to find adoptive parents, in spite of the Adoption and Children (Scotland) Act 2007 having been amended to include a wider range of people who are allowed to adopt. Since that change in 2009, North Ayrshire has seen a steady increase in unmarried and same-sex couples looking to adopt. Although we are starting to see the benefit of that improvement, we need to do still more to promote adoption. I welcome the work that is being done in adoption week, but that effort must continue throughout the year. The increase in the number of children who are available for adoption and the cost of matching them to suitable families is an additional pressure on the scarce resources of local authorities that face further budget cuts from the Government this year. We have to protect the most vulnerable people in society; we have to get it right for every child, particularly where we have corporate responsibility. Children should not suffer because of cuts in the services that are designed to protect them. As Barnardo’s Scotland points out, social workers already have large case loads and are overworked, so local government and central Government must work together to ensure that they are properly resourced. We must also look at kinship carers and how we can best support them by recognising the contribution that they make in reducing the load on the adoption system. At the start of 2012, more than 3,000 children were in kinship care. It is estimated that that number will increase because kinship care is now the first port of call for looked-after children. Although there are no official reasons to explain the rise in kinship care, it may be due to the increasing number of children who are up for adoption, an adoption system that is cumbersome and underresourced, demand exceeding the supply of people who are willing to adopt or foster, or that social services recognise that in most cases it is considered better for the child’s wellbeing if they are placed with close friends or family. However, if we are to make more use of kinship care, we must ensure that proper support and training are in place. In 2011, Citizens Advice Scotland found that some kinship carers had to take time off work or give up employment altogether, and that 55 per cent of kinship carers who could receive kinship care allowance were unsure of their eligibility and were not claiming it. I argue that all family members who care for another’s child or children should receive support and training because, no matter why they are looking after a child, they are giving the same care as foster carers and adoptive parents. We need a realistic policy objective to help all family members who care for another’s child, and we need to give them the proper support that they deserve. Ultimately, the child must come first, so if a family member can help they should be assisted in doing so. Apart from reducing stress for the child, that approach takes pressure off the adoption system. We must also have more robust data collection nationally and adequate support for social services.

I welcome the Scottish Government’s launch of its ready for winter campaign, which I am sure everyone in the chamber supports. I congratulate the Red Cross on its involvement in getting the message out. Winter weather conditions do not affect only our transport services. They can close schools, affect emergency response services, cut off power supplies, affect the economy when people cannot get to work and lead to a loss of income for employees. They can also have a detrimental effect on people’s heath. Severe weather means that those who routinely struggle will suffer disproportionately, because they must not only choose between eating and heating, but take into account keeping the house warm to avoid pipes freezing, and all the misery that burst pipes can bring. For some children school closures can mean time for fun in the snow, but for children in deprived areas who rely on free school meals, it means that they will not get a proper meal until the school reopens. Off-grid issues have been mentioned. What discussions has the Scottish Government had with the Westminster Government and other stakeholders about the 200,000-plus householders who are off-grid in rural locations and who depend on fuel supplies to keep the power running? Is there a co-ordinated effort to ensure that off-grid consumers have access to those vital supplies? What advice is being offered to them? The ready Scotland website seems sparse in its guidance on that. Those consumers consistently suffer problems in the cold months, so what is being done differently this year to alleviate that? All members recently received a briefing from Calor Gas, which explains that last year it had to prioritise the elderly and the vulnerable whose supplies were running dangerously low—not because Calor was running out of supplies, but because country road conditions were too dangerous to drive on as they were not priority roads for gritting. Like others, I welcome the fact that the farmers will help more this year, but I stress that that must be well co-ordinated to ensure the best use of volunteers. Although I am sure that all of us in the chamber understand that there needs to be a priority system for road gritting, we must remember that some rural roads are just as vital to communities as major road links are, and we cannot allow them to be forgotten. Of course that is not only a rural issue: because of budget cuts, councils in urban areas are being more selective about which roads and footpaths in our towns and cities are gritted. Some councils have reduced their stockpiles of salt, while others, because of the cuts in funding that the Government has imposed, are looking at reducing the number of salt bins and considering gritting high-priority roads later in the day. Having to make such cuts can put people’s lives at risk, so we must do all that we can to ensure that local authorities are fully resourced and fully prepared for whatever weather befalls us this winter. We cannot afford to be taken by surprise and see our communities suffer because underfunding means that there is a lack of salt. We tend to think of winter weather as being snow and ice, but what is the Government doing to ensure that local authorities are prepared to deal with the increasing number of floods, which Maureen Watt touched on? I appreciate that it is not easy to predict when and where floods might happen but, with climate change, I think that we can anticipate an increase in the incidence of flooding. If some councils are already stretched to their limits, winter flooding could further exacerbate the strain on resources. We have already had severe flooding in Fife and other areas this year. What support is being offered to tackle the issue? We need to ensure that individuals and communities are prepared for whatever the weather brings this winter. I cannot stress enough the importance of promoting the need for people to check on their vulnerable or elderly neighbours this winter. Ensuring that they have power, heat and food supplies could save lives. People who are willing to help their neighbours to clear footpaths need to know that they can get salt or grit from their council, but that they will have to collect it from the depot, as is the case in North Ayrshire. Scotland cannot afford to be taken by surprise, as it was in 2010. We need to ensure that councils are prepared and properly resourced to keep essential services to the elderly and the vulnerable operating, and to keep our communities safe. We also need to offer support to those consumers who live off the grid and who depend on fuel deliveries to keep the power running.

The Scottish Building Federation and many non-governmental organisations such as Scottish Environment LINK have highlighted that the green investment package and the national retrofit programme are not sufficient to reduce carbon emissions from Scotland’s homes. What discussions has Paul Wheelhouse had with the Minister for Housing and Welfare about meeting their target to cut emissions by 42 per cent and ensuring that there is adequate funding for that?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this vital debate on women’s employment, especially given the recent figures that show that women have been particularly badly hit by the rise in unemployment. As stated in Labour’s amendment, there has been an increase in unemployment “of more than 16 % for all working-age women and more than 30 % for women aged 18 to 24 over the last year alone in Scotland”, and women have also been “disproportionately affected by the loss of around 30,000 public sector jobs over a similar period”. Male unemployment has fallen, while female unemployment continues to increase. Women are undoubtedly being hardest hit by the current economic situation in Britain. It is time that something was done about that. With or without the Government’s summit, women in our labour market still face the same old issues, which need to be tackled. We need less talk and more action on issues that are critical for women in society every day, from a lack of quality part-time work to the gender pay gap. It is great to see groups such as Close the Gap continuing to fight to end the unfair difference between men’s and women’s wages. Even 42 years after the Equal Pay Act 1970, there is still an 11 per cent difference between the wages of men and those of women in part-time work, and a 32 per cent difference between the wages of women in part-time jobs and those of men in full-time jobs. Others have talked about gender differences and occupational segregation. I will devote my time to childcare. Parents in my constituency and across the country routinely raise the issue of the point at which it is no longer cost effective to work and put their children in nursery care, so I welcome the recent announcement that free childcare will be increased by 125 hours a year to 600 hours for three to four-year-olds, but that is still not enough. Why was that move not made sooner—at any time since 2007, for example? It was essential that this Government do that, yet the move has been delayed until now. I welcome the fact that the minister has set up an early years task force to look at the issue. The policy helps people with children of pre-school age, but what is the Government doing to help the employability of women whose children are of school age? This Government will not admit it, but the council tax freeze is impacting on the people of this country. Some local authorities have already closed after-school clubs and breakfast clubs. There are likely to be more closures due to lack of resources in this year’s round of local authority budgets. The loss of those vital services for working mothers makes it almost impossible for some women to hold down a job, because unfortunately we do not all have grannies or relatives who can help with childcare. Only yesterday, I spoke—

Let me finish my point. Only yesterday, I spoke with women from the Dalry breakfast club and after-school care club, which charges £3.50 or £7.50 a day per child during term time and £17 a day per child during school holidays. Those are the lowest amounts that the club can afford to charge to cover costs. The club operates in an area where high-quality jobs are few and far between.

I say to the minister that I am sorry—I had intended to let her in. Many women work to pay for their childcare. Improvements will not be achieved by more summits or meetings. The Government knows why some women cannot work—they simply cannot afford to. The threat from local authorities of less affordable care because of the council tax freeze puts even more people in that situation. We need sensible solutions to this serious problem. Scottish women deserve better.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this Scottish Government debate on the common agricultural policy. I will use my time to highlight numerous concerns that have been brought to my attention. There is uncertainty about when the reforms will be implemented, and any delay could have negative repercussions for rural development. Currently, there are more than 7,500 amendments to the CAP reform proposals. I do not know whether that is a record—perhaps it is the norm for European matters—but dealing with all those amendments before they go to committee in November will take up a great deal of time. The fact that there are so many amendments shows that member states and individuals have a great many concerns about the proposals. Most people accept that the new CAP will not be ready to start in 2014, so the prospect of delays is very real and we need to know exactly what transitional measures will be put in place. I understand that although member states would prefer to see a rollover into another year, the commissioner would not favour that, as it would take the pressure off the need to find an agreement as soon as possible. We need to ensure that bridging is available for programmes such as the less favoured area support scheme and the rural development programme. If that does not happen, any break in funding could have a much wider effect on the rural economy and on any environmental programmes that are currently in place. As part of the CAP reform process, we also need to look again at how we deliver certain payments, such as those under the new entrants scheme, in Scotland’s next rural development programme. It is crucial that we get a new generation into farming. There are young people who want to take up the profession, but it is a difficult area to access, as young people often do not have the capital to start up or to take over a farm. To make that happen, we need to take a more direct approach and provide easier routes into farming. The cabinet secretary acknowledges that a major barrier for potential new farmers is the lack of land for let, and we need to find a variety of new ways to make available land that is not overly expensive, but which offers security of tenure, so I will be interested to hear the findings of the land reform review group on access for new entrants when it reports at the end of 2013. I wish to highlight the issue of the greening of pillar 1. The proposed three-crop rule for people who have more than 3 hectares of arable land would be simply impossible to meet on some of Scotland’s hill farms, because of the environment in those areas. We need to provide more flexibility, either by increasing the hectare requirement or by arguing for a more regional approach to greening so that Scotland’s farmers will not be penalised. If the proposal goes ahead in its current form, it is difficult to see how it will be possible for it to be implemented at all in Scotland. In conclusion, ensuring that 7 per cent of arable land is available for ecological focus areas is a good idea in principle. I agree with Scottish Environment LINK when it argues that “hedgerows, field margins, small areas of scrub and gorse, small woodlands and unproductive field corners ... should all be eligible for support under this measure.” Intensively managed grassland should also be included—that would allow most Scottish farmers to meet the 7 per cent requirement easily. I urge the Scottish Government to work closely with the United Kingdom Government to ensure that we get the best possible deal by arguing for more objective criteria and pressing for a fairer share of the UK budget. Moving away from historic spend to a more flexible regional system would also be beneficial. Historically in pillar 1, money goes to intensive farming, so England, because it has less hill land, gets more funding than Scotland.

Perhaps I am more optimistic than Ms MacDonald. If what constituted eligible land was changed to include heather and gorse land, Scotland would be entitled to more funding—that seems to be a more equitable approach. It is clear that many issues remain over CAP, but if we all care about Scotland, how it looks and how we can all benefit, we should all be ensuring that we get the best value from the vast amount of funding that we get from Europe—more than £600 million. It is not just about farmers, it is about the whole rural economy, which includes our environment, our rural communities and the food that we eat. Instead of focusing on what Scotland could do if it was independent, we need to work together and get the best deal we possibly can for Scotland in Europe.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. Given that the public consultation has been extended until 26 September, I hope that the debate will inform the process and generate ideas that will be included in the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill. The bill is intended to strengthen our communities and allow them to take over public assets, where appropriate, to make them more responsive to the community’s needs. The intention is also to enable communities to use vacant and unused properties, to enhance the urban environment. Empowering and devolving certain powers to communities is long overdue. Ideas such as a community right to buy, devolving certain budgets to communities and giving communities control of assets have been talked about for a long time. I am pleased that they are being developed. Communities currently attempt to improve the places in which they live, but they tend to find the current legislation a hindrance rather than a help. I will welcome the bill if it can make the process easier and if the correct checks and balances are included, to give communities the power to improve their areas, if they wish to do so, while being protected should projects fail. Volunteer Development Scotland warns that we must be careful not to thrust too many powers on to communities that either do not want them or do not have the capacity to fully manage them. That would serve only to increase inequalities and burden our communities. In addition, the bill must not be seen as a money-saving exercise involving the transfer of assets to communities simply to remove them from public service budgets. We need to get this right; we must not half-heartedly put in place a range of measures with the aim of devolving powers to local communities and leave it at that. Instead, we must involve third sector bodies, voluntary organisations and all parts of local authorities to work together to ensure that projects are sustainable. That is a key point. We must ensure that projects are sustainable and consider what will happen if a community project fails for whatever reason—for example, because the community leader has left the area. Will the asset revert back to the previous owner or be sold on the open market? In that case, robust measures must be in place to ensure that there is no financial gain for individuals. We must remember that communities differ throughout Scotland, so any legislation that deals with community empowerment must define exactly what is meant by a community. Do we mean community councils, community associations and tenants associations, or would any constituted group be allowed to take over an asset as long as there was a benefit to the community? We need further clarity on that. In North Ayrshire, we already have practical examples of communities that are working together and enhancing their urban and rural environments. Pennyburn Regeneration Youth Development Enterprise—or PRYDE—brought the community together when it transformed the disused New Penny pub into a youth drop-in centre. It had to acquire the building, get planning permission and obtain funding, as well as build the capacity of volunteers. All of that took around 10 years. The centre has since opened and become a vibrant community hub and resource instead of being a vacant, run-down building that was an eyesore in the centre of the estate. That success was more to do with the volunteers’ determination than with the help that was received from other agencies. It is good that the consultation paper talks about updating the allotment legislation. The Garnock valley allotment association in Kilbirnie and the Eglinton growers in Kilwinning have shown that such projects bring into use land that would otherwise lie vacant. We have already heard about the benefits of allotments through promoting health and wellbeing and sustainable communities, and bringing communities together to grow healthy foods that could be put back into the community. I welcome the idea that more land could be made available for allotments by using unused and underused public sector land, if that is what the community wants. To conclude, we need to ensure that we get the bill right and actually empower communities throughout Scotland. We cannot allow it to increase inequalities by shifting public assets to communities that do not want them and do not have the resources to manage them, or to where that would not be sustainable. The idea could really breathe new life into communities by allowing them to decide what is best for them, based on local ingenuity and the availability of resources.

The minister spoke of new alliances to share expertise and innovation in low-carbon technologies. With that in mind, what is the Government doing to ensure that the technologies not only benefit Scotland but are exported to developing countries so that they, too, can access environmentally sound technologies and the corresponding know-how, particularly on how initial development can be sustained?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. As has been said, the bill’s aim is to convert ultra-long leases into ownership. That means that leases that are for more than 175 years and which have more than 100 years left to run will convert to ownership, unless a tenant opts out. The bill will protect landlords’ rights by providing compensation and will move the system away from an unnecessary and complex form of land tenure. It is estimated that there are 9,000 ultra-long leases in Scotland that the bill could affect, but getting an exact figure is difficult. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s responses to the concerns that were raised at stages 1 and 2—[Interruption.] I am sorry; I have promoted the minister again. However, I feel that a few issues with the bill remain. We will need to monitor how the bill interacts with the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill. I believe that Registers of Scotland needs to update the land register, so that it holds an accurate record that reflects the conversion of ultra-long leases to ownership under the Long Leases (Scotland) Bill. However, I accept the minister’s assurance—he has been demoted again—that the Long Leases (Scotland) Bill will not require any further amendments to reflect that and that the land register will be updated independently. I note that there are still concerns surrounding common good assets. As the issue is extremely complex, that is of little wonder. I welcome the minister’s comments this morning, because there is still a lack of confidence on accuracy where common good assets are concerned. For example, there was some confusion in Kilmarnock recently over whether the land on which the new athletics centre at Queen’s Drive was to be built was common good land. In 2010, the matter was discussed by the council and the idea of a long lease was floated. The council then decided that it was not common good land and that the common good land was on the other side of the river. The latest information that I have, which I received yesterday, is that it is common good land. Having a comprehensive list of what is and is not a common good asset would help with such issues in the future, and there would be cost savings in the long run. I welcome the minister’s agreement that it would be useful to compile a register of all common good assets at some point in the future. In recognition of the fact that that will be an extremely difficult and expensive exercise for local authorities, the Scottish Government should work with councils to find better ways to collect the information. I wonder whether funding support could be found to make that happen. I welcome the bill, as it dispenses with the archaic system of ultra-long leases, but we need to ensure that Registers of Scotland updates the land register.

The recession is biting and there has been a rise in female unemployment. We need to take the opportunity to change the status of women in work for the better. We must work towards creating a more aspirational society for the young women in our country, in which women are presented not with glass ceilings and low wages but with the flexibility to have a family and a career that is not just a job. Scotland might have experienced the biggest fall in unemployment in the UK, but female unemployment increased by 23 per cent last year. We must take the Government’s positive spin with a pinch of salt. Earlier this year I was glad when the minister announced a women’s employment summit, and I welcome her comments about that today. Unemployment among Scottish women has risen from around 85,000 to 105,000 during the past year alone, so it is only right that the Government should start to set out a process whereby the rapid increase in women’s unemployment can be halted. Nursery care costs have risen by 6 per cent, and 44 per cent fewer families receive help with childcare costs. We need to consider how we can change the culture, so that instead of childcare being expensive and inflexible it is accessible to working parents from all walks of life. That will be a difficult task, but we need to address the matter. I welcome the changes in relation to greater qualifications in the childcare sector, to bring about better care. We must ensure that childcare is not just an easily affordable service but a profession—a female-dominated one, at that—that works for providers and users. As well as making it easier for women to access work, we need to tackle the quality of work that is available. Women should have access to work that is fairly paid and has reasonable hours. In a recent survey, the recruitment service Timewise Jobs found that 72 per cent of Britons think that it is not possible to have a senior job and work part time. Timewise also found that one in seven part-time workers tries to hide their status from their colleagues. An unacceptable stigma is attached to part-time work. That needs to change. We need a culture in which part-time work is no longer viewed negatively and the flexibility and additional options that part-time work affords are encouraged. We need to dispel the connotations of low quality, low status and low pay that are associated with part-time work. Many jobs and sectors could be better suited to part-time working or working from home. We should promote a positive approach to part-time jobs and the flexibility that they bring for women, particularly women who have childcare or other caring responsibilities. We all too often hear about the pay gap between men and women. The most recent figures indicate that, on average, there is still a 10.7 per cent gap between male and female pay. We must work to see that that stops. Groups that are working to decrease the gap, such as Close the Gap, are making substantial inroads to paving the way for companies in both the public and private sectors to secure equal pay, but not enough is being done. The Equal Pay Act 1970, which came into force in 1975—37 years ago—has failed to be enforced for far too long. We need to ensure that the same is not the case with the Equality Act 2010. Companies should seek to change stereotypes, not perpetuate them. Women should not be turned down or overlooked for the possibility of promotion for fear that they cannot commit to the hours or that they may require maternity leave in the future.

What discussions has the Scottish Government had to ensure that, in the new system following CAP reform, only those who actively farm the land are entitled to receive the single farm payment? Does the Scottish Government believe that provision should be made to prevent the single farm payment from being shared with the landlord as part of the rent?

The cabinet secretary said much in his statement about the new powers that member states will have to make decisions on fishing. How does he foresee member states working together in a multilateral way to deliver on those objectives?

The common fisheries policy was discussed at length in the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, although those discussions took place before I was on the committee, so I have been playing catch-up so as not to let the fish off the hook. As most people will know, the process started in July 2011, when the European Commission released its proposal for the revised CFP to replace the 2002 policy, which was widely regarded as broken and in desperate need of replacement, as noted in evidence given to the committee and stated in the chamber today. It has become increasingly clear that the CFP is effectively a one-size-fits-nobody policy that has damaged our fisheries and fishermen’s livelihoods by failing to work in EU markets. It has also damaged our environment by failing to create sustainable fisheries, leading to a high level of overfishing. In a written submission, the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation noted that there were two critical failures with the 2002 reform: “overly detailed ‘one size fits all’ management from the centre”; and “the lack of reliable data to assess ... many stocks and fisheries”, making them difficult to manage. That said, the Scottish pelagic sector urged the committee to ensure that the reforms retain the positives of the old policy from which the sector benefited. Since July, there have been on-going discussions about the reform among numerous member states, the industry, non-governmental organisations and civil society in an attempt to influence the policy before it is implemented in 2013. I will focus on maximum sustainable yield, the introduction of a discard ban and regionalisation. WWF estimates that about 75 per cent of fish stock in Europe is overfished and that if the practice continues nine out of 10 stocks will be at unsustainable levels by 2022. The practice was allowed to continue under the previous policy, so the introduction of maximum sustainable yield should go some way towards reversing that position. The main problem with the introduction of MSY, however, is that the data that we have for some stocks may be unreliable, and reliance on out of date or inaccurate data means that stocks could still be over or underfished. In 2009, the Scottish Government noted that the achievement of MSY for mixed fish stocks would not be possible and could lead to discards. While I support the principle of MSY, we need to be careful about how it is implemented; if we are not, it could cause more harm than good. The introduction of a discard ban by 2016 is a tough task but we should strive to achieve it because discards are wasteful and uneconomic. We cannot achieve a long-term, sustainable future for the marine environment, the species within it and the people who depend on those species if the practice of discards continues. That leads me to regionalisation. The problem will not be solved with a one-size-fits-all policy due to the great variations within the EU. The committee noted that regionalisation is the main proposal that the reform needs to deliver—developing a policy that suits each member state underpins the success of the reform. Decentralised decision making needs to be made to work, and made to work effectively. If the policy is devolved, that would allow coastal states to develop their own solutions to issues while allowing key stakeholders and those with local expertise to come to the forefront to manage their own fishing industry effectively and sustainably. As noted by the committee from its evidence-taking sessions, that approach would also allow member states to have a certain level of flexibility to employ their own methods of fisheries management. In response to a letter sent on behalf of the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, Maria Damanaki stated that the aim of regionalisation was to “move away from micromanagement at Union level and to ensure that rules are adapted to the specificities of a sea basin.” Keeping in mind the fact that fish do not recognise borders, l fully support decentralised decision making and the process of regionalisation. I leave members with the final thought that we need to work with the UK Government in Scotland’s interest. We need to develop a united front on the issue for the sake of our fishing industry. We punch above our weight on fishing issues because we are part of the United Kingdom and our influence would be severely curtailed if Scotland were to separate from the UK.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. When I spoke in the—fairly recent—stage 1 debate on the bill, I said that the bill’s main aims were to create a better environment for the letting of farmland to the tenant farming sector of the agricultural industry and to encourage new entrants into tenant farming. I was part of the delegation that visited Bute and I have visited farms on the mainland, so I now have a much better understanding of the issues that face the sector. I have spoken to several tenant farmers, who identified the two main issues arising from the bill as the amendment of the definition of “near relative” and the prevention of certain restrictions in relation to rent reviews in limited duration tenancies. I note that there was no change in the definition of “near relative” at stage 2. The definition still includes grandchildren as well as a surviving spouse, civil partner or natural or adopted child, but it has not been widened. I still agree with the Scottish Tenant Farmers Association and NFU Scotland, which want the definition to be widened. The STFA said in evidence to the committee that it wanted the definition “to be extended beyond a grandchild to include nephews and nieces”, and the NFUS noted: “It seems a little bit strange that, during your lifetime, you can assign a tenancy to a wider class of people, yet, at the point of your death, it is restricted to certain categories.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 18 January 2012; c 520, 522.] Scottish Land & Estates expressed fear that extending the definition could destabilise the balance of rights between landlords and tenants and reduce the flexibility of the landlord. That is a valid point. One farmer I spoke to recently took over the farm from his uncle as none of the uncle’s close family members wanted to take up the reins. It seems unfortunate that, if the farmer had died without assigning the farm to his nephew, the family would have lost out although it was clear that the nephew wanted to take over the farm and had a genuine interest in it. The nephew would not have been able to succeed to the farm and he would have lost out on that opportunity—and the farming community would have lost out on a new young entrant to the industry.

It seems odd that the farm can be assigned to anyone while the farmer is alive, yet at the point of death it can be passed only to a select few who might not have any interest in continuing the business, with the result that the farm reverts to the landlord. There was also widespread support for the provision on rent reviews. The STFA argued in its written evidence that “This proposal will remove the disadvantage felt by tenants finding themselves in a position of weakness when negotiating the terms of a lease in a sellers market and having to agree to such conditions.” Tenants expressed many concerns about the current process for conducting rent reviews—including the formula for calculating the appropriate rental levels for farms. Many thought that, even though the process was set out well in legislation and guidance, in practice it did not always work out that way. Others considered that further work was required—including an agreed process for conducting reviews and the establishment of a set formula for calculating rent reviews to remove the uncertainty and stress over when reviews will take place. This amendment will go some way towards tackling that issue, but there is still work to be done. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement that a working group will be set up to look at rent reviews. Ideally, landlords need to be confident to let and tenants need to be confident to invest. There are still many issues to be addressed if we are to improve the relationship between landlords and tenants, to ensure that farmers and landlords can go about their essential business, and attract new entrants into the farming sector.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what support is available for GP surgeries in remote areas. (S4O-01060)

Is the cabinet secretary aware that, on the island of Cumbrae, three of the current general practitioners are due to retire in April next year, and that four of the six surgery staff are likely to be made redundant? I pay tribute to the excellent service that they have all provided for many years. The doctors on the island are worried that, once they retire, the islanders might not have access to out-of-hours care, which currently seems to be funded by a dispensary service that is due to close because a pharmacy opened on the island. Has she had any discussions with NHS Ayrshire and Arran about the situation? Can she assure us that the islanders will continue to have access to vital out-of-hours services?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate at stage 1 of the Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill. I share the Welfare Reform Committee’s concerns about the UK Welfare Reform Act 2012, as the reforms hit the poorest and most vulnerable hardest. They are suffering the hidden cost of undue stress and anxiety in worrying about the effects that the reforms will have on their benefits or whether they will still qualify for those benefits. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government has set up the committee and is trying to alleviate the damage that the act will cause. However, many questions remain, a few of which I will cover today. The Scottish Government estimates that the bedroom tax could affect up to 39 per cent of working-age households in receipt of housing benefit. However, that is only a rough estimate, as many local authorities are still trying to develop a complete picture. Those affected will have their housing benefit cut by 14 per cent or 25 per cent, depending on the number of bedrooms that they are underoccupying. The Scottish Government and local authorities must address that mismatch in the housing stock so that tenants are not unfairly penalised, and do not fall into debt or get evicted because they are no longer able to afford the bedroom tax. In addition, there are many issues surrounding the proposed universal credit. The new system is designed to simplify the benefit system by moving towards an online and telephone system, but it could have the opposite effect of making benefits more difficult to access. Many people do not have access to an internet connection, and those who try through the telephone system may find that they are missing out on benefits to which they are entitled. In particular, people with disabilities will find it even harder to claim the benefits that they need to survive. I note that the Scottish Association for Mental Health and Ecas raised concerns with the committee numerous times that the new system could introduce many new problems and issues in relation to claiming benefits, claiming the correct benefits and even filling out the applications correctly. However, I did not find out from the committee report what will happen to benefits staff in Scottish councils. They are a valuable resource with local expertise and they can deal with complex claims. Will they find a new role in helping customers to move to universal credit using an electronic claim form, or will those posts be lost? Will those staff transfer to the DWP under the Transfer of Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 2006? We simply do not know. Unison suggests that, if councils do not provide that support, other services such as Citizens Advice will be overloaded with those seeking help, support and advice. If that advice is not available, many people will lose out on benefits to which they are rightly entitled, which could lead to serious financial implications, the loss of lifeline services or—potentially—homelessness due to people not being able to claim housing benefit. COSLA considers that “Welfare Reform alone could lead to up to an additional 3000 homeless presentations in Scotland.” The committee report noted that Citizens Advice in England and Wales has been allocated additional resources. Although the report acknowledges that it is the DWP’s responsibility to provide full and proper advice, we cannot just depend on the DWP to do so. This Government must take action to ensure that independent advice is available. In 2010-11, Citizens Advice Scotland dealt with 203,462 benefits issues for clients. It expects that figure to increase dramatically—and it is already increasing—with the new changes. The Scottish Government should allocate that vital service additional resources. That money could be taken from the £3.2 million gained from the Barnett consequentials for the purpose of investing in support services—or are we leaving the responsibility solely at the door of the DWP? Where is the provision in the bill for the localisation of the social fund? Community care grants and crisis loans are due to be devolved. Although there is a commitment from the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing that there will be a social fund bill in 2013-14, to be introduced in 2015, would it not be more beneficial for such a provision to be included in this bill? It seems unnecessary to create two bills to deal with welfare reform, especially when the community care grants and crisis loans for general living expenses will be abolished from April 2013 and the new social fund bill will not be introduced until 2015—

In a second. A series of interim arrangements will be put in place till then.

I am in my last minute.

Already cash-strapped councils will find it very difficult to cope with the costs of administration and new software, particularly if they do not know what the details of the new system will be, and claimants will be worried that vital support will not be there when they need it most. I urge the Scottish Government to work closely with COSLA—I welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement that she will create a post in COSLA to work on those critically important areas—and to adjust the bill so that it deals with the social fund, or to provide answers to the Parliament on what provisions will be in place. The Scottish Government did not put us in this position but, although I see the bill as a good start, many questions remain to be answered and many aspects are not covered by the bill. We need to be more forward thinking on those issues so that we can put in place the necessary provisions and support now, instead of trying to implement them when the problem is already on our doorstep.

Obesity is a major problem in Scotland. We have one of the highest rates of obesity—only the United States of America and Mexico have higher levels. The latest Scottish Government figures, in 2010, show that 27.4 per cent of those aged 16 to 64 were considered obese, which is a rise of 10.2 per cent since 1995. On average, the percentages were slightly higher for children. According to the Scottish health survey, 32.5 per cent of children had a BMI outwith the healthy range. More worryingly, “Preventing Overweight and Obesity in Scotland” estimates that by 2030, 40 per cent of the adult population in Scotland will be obese. Obesity not only increases the risk of diabetes but leads to high blood pressure and an increased risk of heart attacks. The projected increases by 2030 in all of those show concerning trends. Furthermore, there is the pressure on the health service’s resources. The report estimates that NHS costs will have doubled by 2030. I am sure that the scale of the problem is clear to everyone in the chamber. The real issue is what we can do to reverse those trends so that the 2030 predictions do not come to pass. Physical activity is important, but it is not the only way to tackle obesity. First, we need to raise awareness of the issue. The recent growing up in Scotland study found that nine out of 10 parents with obese or overweight children did not recognise that there was a problem. That is a worrying statistic and would seem to suggest that we are failing to raise awareness and educate parents effectively so that they raise the next generation to have healthy eating habits and active lifestyles. Secondly, we need to promote the benefits of breastfeeding. Audit Scotland’s 2010-11 overview of the NHS showed that many NHS services were failing to meet breastfeeding targets. It is clear that more work needs to be done in that area to encourage and promote breastfeeding. A recent study carried out by the Economic and Social Research Institute in Ireland found that “children who had been breast-fed for three to six months were 38 per cent less likely to be obese at nine years of age compared to exclusively formula-fed children. Those breast-fed for six months or more were 51 per cent less likely to be obese.” Numerous studies throughout the world have come to the same conclusion. We need to do more to promote breastfeeding in Scotland. Continuing the catch-them-young theme, the jumpstart programme run by NHS Ayrshire and Arran holds activities all around Ayrshire for kids aged from five to 15, encouraging them to eat more healthily and exercise more. Starting at five means that those children develop healthier lifestyles that become the norm, and they take that with them throughout their lives. Jumpstart is a 10-week programme that consists of a range of fun activities and allows the children to make new friends. Parents, too, benefit by discussing ideas, sharing tips and getting tailor-made programmes to use at home for their child. Once they have completed the course, children who took part get a free pass for a local leisure centre for six months. So far the programme has been a great success. As of November 2011, 550 children and young people have taken part, and the numbers have been increasing. The spin-off is that parents are getting involved and learning about obesity and the associated problems, too. The successful jumpstart programme’s popularity was spread mainly through word of mouth. Programmes such as that, which raise awareness and help tackle obesity, could reach many more young people if we put more effort into promoting them. The forthcoming Commonwealth games offer an excellent opportunity to develop activity programmes and raise awareness of obesity, but we must ensure that all parts of Scotland benefit, rather than focusing solely on areas where the games are taking place. I welcome the minister’s announcements today. However, the Government is failing to meet its pre-election pledge from the 2007 Scottish National Party manifesto, in which it promised to “ensure that every pupil has 2 hours of quality PE each week delivered by specialist PE teachers.” In November 2010, it was reported that only 55 per cent of primary school children and 23 per cent of secondary 1 to secondary 4 pupils were getting that amount of PE, and that, in most cases, it was not being delivered by specialist PE teachers. Despite the Government pulling money from the education budget and sportscotland to provide local authorities with additional resources, that pledge has now been watered down to just two periods per week for S1 to S4 pupils. We all understand that money is tight, but it would make more sense to spend to save: to be more efficient in supporting and promoting healthy and active lifestyles, and in so doing to reduce obesity. We cannot afford to fail, and we need to do more to ensure that we prevent the 2030 predictions from coming true.

We need to become more effective at preventing obesity rather than just dealing with the consequences later. The clock is ticking, and we need to get that right.

Given the high number of people who are currently in food poverty, what is the Government doing to ensure that, where possible, people can access locally produced food? What more will he do to ensure that the Government not only promotes our food and drink industry internationally, but promotes locally sourced, affordable food at home?

4. To ask the Scottish Executive how it encourages the use of credit unions. (S4O-00952)

The minister will remember our recent members’ business debate on high-interest pay day loans, during which most members who spoke suggested that credit unions should be instrumental in helping people in debt, who often have loans with several different high-interest pay day loan companies. Will the minister update members on the progress that has been made in tackling high-interest pay day loan companies and on whether any financial support has been offered to credit unions so that they can help the thousands of people who are caught in an ever-increasing spiral of debt?

10. To ask the Scottish Executive when it will devolve more powers to schools. (S4O-00928)

Will the minister clarify the Government’s position on the exact powers that will remain with councils and the powers that will go to headteachers? How much control of education will be held by the Scottish National Party Government in Edinburgh?

I am afraid that I will repeat much of what has already been said, but I intend to reinforce it. The bill is similar in nature to the bill that was introduced in November 2010, although it contains some amendments that are based on the Justice Committee’s original findings and recommendations in session 3. Many of the issues in the bill were changed before it came back to the Parliament this session. The bill aims to convert ultra-long leases to ownerships. The leases are those that are for more than 175 years and have more than 100 years left to run. They will convert to ownership, unless the tenant opts out. The bill will also protect landlords’ rights by providing compensation; clarify the position of lenders; and move away from an unnecessarily complex form of land tenure. As has been said, it is estimated that the bill will affect 9,000 ultra-long leases in Scotland. The committee recommends that the Parliament supports the general principles of the bill, but points out that some issues that were raised in evidence should be considered before stage 2. Brodies LLP called for clarity on sections 64 and 69, to put beyond doubt what can be included in annual rent. Although the people who gave evidence on that felt that the issue was clear in the explanatory notes, they argued that the same could not be said for the bill. Another issue is the way in which the bill interacts with the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill. There was a call for Registers of Scotland to update the land register to accurately reflect the conversion of ultra-long leases to ownership under the bill. The committee recommends that the land register should be updated to accurately reflect ownership and that the Scottish Government should respond to that concern. I thank the minister for clarifying that individual owners can apply to have the land register updated. The Long Leases (Scotland) Bill might need to be amended at a later date, depending on the way in which it interacts with the Land Registration etc (Scotland) Bill. Every member who has spoken has raised the issue of common good land, although it is not directly related to the bill. There does not appear to be a comprehensive list of common good assets that local authorities throughout Scotland hold. The committee noted that it would be a complex task to compile a register that is 100 per cent accurate. It would be expensive and time consuming to produce a list of all common good properties, but that should be considered. I hope that officials will work with local authorities on that. During the evidence taking on the bill, the small number of common good properties that we are aware will be affected by the bill more than doubled, from four to nine. As common good leases are in the public interest, the committee calls on the Scottish Government to work with councils to find better ways to collect information so that we better understand the effect that the bill will have on common good properties. The committee took evidence on the City of Edinburgh Council’s request for the Waverley market site to be exempt. That is a complex case. Based on the information that was provided, the committee decided that the case had not been made and that we could not say whether the Waverley market should be exempt. I am glad to hear that the minister is investigating ways of addressing the issue. The committee urges the Parliament to support the general principles of the bill and to allow it to progress, but calls on the Scottish Government to investigate further the issues that have been raised in the debate, some of which do not arise directly from the bill.

I thank Kenny Gibson for bringing this debate on allotments to the chamber. As the motion states, allotments bring great benefits to communities. They used to be extremely popular in this country, and I welcome the fact that they are becoming popular again. It is good to see that 70 community vegetable plots and 72 individual allotment plots have been created in North Ayrshire: in Kilbirnie, for the Garnock valley allotment association; and in Kilwinning, where the Big Lottery Fund has awarded more than £99,000 to Eglinton growers. That money will be used to create community gardens and more than 80 allotment plots, which will be available for the residents of Kilwinning and Irvine to use. Such schemes not only promote health and wellbeing, but are a practical example of sustainable communities where people can come together to grow healthy foods such as fresh vegetables. On top of that, they bring a whole range of educational benefits. They are an example of the think global, act local mentality and can be used to promote the tackling of climate change at a very local level. Anyone of any age can get involved in the activity that they encourage people to participate in. Beyond that, the plots promote social aims, in that they provide a sense of community cohesion and give those who are involved the chance to meet new people who share similar interests, as well as keeping them active through the physical aspect of gardening. What better way to promote a healthy body and mind? The green gym is another good idea that the motion mentions. As the chair of the North Ayrshire community planning partnership, I have seen at first hand how it has benefited the people with mental health problems who have participated in it. In North Ayrshire, the scheme has been renamed “breaking ground” and it is run by North Ayrshire Council’s education department and rangers from Eglinton park, and is backed by the national health service. The aims of the breaking ground group are to learn new skills, to establish a regular routine and to meet new people. In addition to improving mental and physical health, its work helps to improve the environment. The scheme introduces people to environmental conservation work, in which many participants may never previously have been involved so, like the allotments, it promotes environmental education. When people take part, they may carry out a number of tasks, from tree planting to path building or clearing land. The group has recently carried out a humongous amount of work on a garden project in Eglinton park, which has involved the making of willow fences, the building of a pond and bird tables, and the planting of hedges. Bee, wasp and butterfly beds have also been created, which will provide a resource for the public and schoolchildren when they visit the park. As well as benefiting the community’s outdoor spaces, that work will help to promote wider use of them. The motion highlights the great way in which local volunteers, communities, third sector organisations and councils can make a real difference in improving health and wellbeing at the same time as promoting sustainable communities and environmental conservation and education. We should nurture such schemes and ideas in Scotland, not only to promote and regenerate our outdoor and green spaces, but to help us tackle climate change. The examples that I have given are true examples of thinking globally and acting locally, and they come with great health and community benefits.

As other members have said, the Ofgem consultation—project transmit—has been widely welcomed, as in its current form the transmission network’s use of system charging arrangements places a higher cost on Scottish renewable energy generators when they connect to the electricity network than on generators in other parts of Great Britain. Project transmit is designed to provide a fairer and more equitable system so that we can bring people out of fuel poverty and encourage investment in renewable energy sources. The main problem with the current system is that it was designed for an era in which the vast majority of our electricity was generated by power stations rather than renewable sources. Many of those old sources of electricity generation developed next to population bases, so electricity could be transported cheaply to the areas that used the largest percentage of power. The problem arises when we consider the fact that many renewable energy developments are not built next to centres of high population, because areas that are ideal for wind, wave or tidal projects, such as the Scottish islands, are often remote. That could affect investment in those resources, as the cost of transmitting the electricity to populated areas that need it could well be far too high. Therefore, any changes that would lower transmission charges would help to encourage investment in Scotland’s renewables sector. We need to ensure that the new pricing regime is right for Scotland and that nowhere is placed at a disadvantage. Project transmit is our chance to get the pricing structure right for future generations and to ensure that investment in the renewables sector is not stunted by a pricing regime that hampers the islands. The current pricing structure treats Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles differently from the mainland, which means that onshore generators on the islands are charged more than onshore generators on the mainland. If that practice continues, it could lead to wind farm developments being built offshore at a higher cost, which would ultimately be passed on to the consumer through higher bills. It could also serve to discourage investment in onshore renewables and community-based projects, which would be a devastating blow to the development of Scottish renewables, as some disadvantaged areas are in the best locations for renewable energy. We hope that Ofgem will listen to our suggestions and develop a solution to that problem. Our amendment urges the Scottish Government to take action, should Ofgem fail to alter the pricing regime, leaving the islands at a disadvantage compared with other areas. As others have mentioned, that could be done through the current review of ROCs—the islands could be allocated additional ROCs, the money from which could be invested in renewables and used to encourage community developments. Ideally, we need to ensure that we get the pricing structure right now. This is our chance to encourage more investment in renewables and to promote community-based projects. If that is done right, it could promote employment and reduce fuel poverty by helping to keep consumers’ bills down. If Ofgem does not take steps to amend its proposals, the Scottish Government should do its duty and use its powers to take action.

The bill aims to create a better environment for the letting of farmland to the tenant farming sector of the agricultural industry and to encourage new entrants into the sector by making three main changes to the existing legislation. First, it seeks to amend the definition of “near relative”; secondly, it will prevent certain restrictions with regard to rent reviews in limited duration tenancies; and thirdly, it will disapply VAT-rate changes and options to tax as being variations in rent that prevent rent reviews. I will discuss those three changes individually. The bill aims to expand the definition of “near relative” to include grandchildren; the definition currently covers only a surviving spouse, a civil partner or a natural or adopted child. Although the committee agreed unanimously on the need to widen the definition, there was debate about whether the bill goes far enough. I agree with the Scottish Tenant Farmers Association and the NFUS, which want the definition to be widened further. In its evidence to the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, the STFA stated that it wants the definition “to be extended beyond a grandchild to include nephews and nieces.” The NFUS noted: “It seems a little bit strange that, during your lifetime, you can assign a tenancy to a wider class of people, yet, at the point of your death, it is restricted to certain categories.”—[Official Report, Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee, 18 January 2012; c 520, 522.] I see no practical reason why the definition of “near relative” cannot be extended. Fears were expressed by Scottish Land & Estates that extension could destabilise the balance between the rights of landlords and the rights of tenants, but that would be unlikely if the definition were extended just to nephews and nieces. That part of the bill needs to be explored further. We must be careful in applying transitional provisions retrospectively. Applying legislation retrospectively seems to be a bad idea, and if the bill were to be applied retrospectively it would need to be extremely clear about whom it would and would not affect, in order to avoid any confusion. I welcome the Government’s commitment to lodge an amendment to clarify that at stage 2. There is widespread support for the provision on rent reviews. In its written submission, the STFA argued that “This proposal will remove the disadvantage felt by tenants finding themselves in a position of weakness when negotiating the terms of a lease in a sellers’ market and having to agree to such conditions.” Although there is no empirical evidence of any such upward-only or landlord-only rent review clauses, it is known that such leases exist. They may be only small in number, but they need to be tackled. Although the provision might restrict some freedoms in negotiating contracts, it should have no unforeseen negative effects. Therefore, the committee welcomes the change for now, as long as it is not retrospective. The provision that disqualifies VAT-rate changes and options to tax from being variations in rent that prevent rent reviews was supported in almost all the evidence that was submitted to the committee. The STFA notes that the changes will “bring Scotland in line with England”, and the committee fully supports the changes, and sees no issues with them. There are still some issues with the bill, and certain aspects need to be refined. However, the committee currently agrees with the provisions, although more evidence needs to be taken on what some of them would mean in practice and whether further changes need to be made. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s meeting with the TFF next week and hope that it will be fruitful in relation to land availability and support for new tenants.

The incoming housing benefit changes are extremely worrying and will have a significant effect in Scotland. The Scottish Parliament information centre has estimated that as of December 2011 more than 475,000 people in Scotland were in receipt of housing benefit: 80 per cent in the social rented sector and the other 20 per cent in the private sector. The UK Government claims that the reforms are needed to tackle growing expenditure on benefit and are driven by its desire to create a fairer system. However, it is hard to see what is fairer about a proposed system that could have devastating effects on not only Scotland but the whole UK; that could penalise people because there is not enough housing stock or housing of the right size; and that could see homelessness rise. The benefit reforms will hit the poorest and most vulnerable people hardest and will damage local economies. North Ayrshire Council estimates that the reforms will mean a £50 million loss to the North Ayrshire economy during the next six years. Many other local authorities are in a similar position. The Government estimates that the bedroom tax could affect up to 39 per cent of the working-age households that are in receipt of housing benefit, but that is only a rough estimate, because many local authorities are still trying to develop a complete picture. People who are affected will have their housing benefit cut by 14 or 25 per cent, depending on the number of bedrooms by which they are deemed to be underoccupying, which represents average losses of £27 or £65 per month. Those are substantial amounts for people on low incomes. The Scottish Government and councils need to start working together to develop local housing strategies and policies—in particular, allocation policies—to meet the demands of each area. They will need to ensure that the housing stock can be maximised to meet tenants’ needs, and they must ensure that people are not unfairly penalised, do not fall into debt and are not evicted because they can no longer afford their rent as a result of the benefit change. The proposed universal credit raises many other issues, not least the direct payment of the housing costs element to tenants. Universal credit is supposed to simplify the benefits system. The Government’s target is for 80 per cent of forms to be completed electronically, which could make the benefit more difficult to access for people who are not computer literate or do not have access to a computer. There is also the serious issue of what will happen to benefits staff in Scottish councils. Will they find a new role helping customers to move to universal credit through the electronic claim form? Will their posts be lost? Will they transfer to the DWP? We still do not know the answer to those questions. A valuable staff resource—people who have local expertise and who can deal with complex housing benefit claims—might be lost. If councils do not provide support, Unison suggests that services such as citizens advice bureaux will be overloaded with people who are seeking help, support and advice. If advice is not available, many people will lose out on benefits to which they are entitled, which will have serious financial implications and could lead to homelessness. We must stand with the organisations that oppose the reforms, which are not and never will be fair. Scottish councils and the Scottish Government must do everything that is in their power to mitigate the effects of the benefit changes. We cannot willingly allow the poorest and most vulnerable people in society to be left to bear the burden of a truly unjust reform.

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what percentage of Scotland’s electrical energy is generated through (a) nuclear, (b) coal and (c) renewables and whether its 2020 target for renewable electricity will be met. (S4O-00800)

The electricity generation policy statement makes numerous references to Hunterston and suggests that its life as a nuclear plant could be extended by up to five years or that it could be a new contender for a carbon capture and storage plant. The minister might not be aware that, at a meeting of North Ayrshire Council on 5 March, Scottish National Party members voted against the Labour Party and removed Hunterston from the local development plan. There has been widespread opposition to a new coal-fired plant, including from the SNP constituency MSP, Kenny Gibson. I ask the minister to confirm just what the Government’s policy is on Hunterston. Does it feature as part of the Government’s plans? When does the minister expect a decision on the Hunterston CCS project proposal?

We have made it clear today that Scottish Labour supports the curriculum for excellence and wants it to work for our schools, teachers and children. We want it to be implemented in the smoothest manner possible. If it is implemented correctly, it will have the opportunity to deliver benefits for pupils and to offer them a more comprehensive and more broadly based education. Contrary to what the cabinet secretary seems to think, we have nothing against change. The curriculum for excellence is our children’s future, which is why it needs to be done right—not railroaded through when schools and parents have genuine concerns about its implementation. When unions, teachers, headteachers, parents and councils are asking the Scottish National Party Government to stop and listen, the Government needs to do that. If parents and teachers do not feel confident in the new system, it will not work. If the SNP continues to refuse to listen to their growing concerns, we cannot blame them for losing trust in the SNP on the education portfolio. The Government needs to look at the evidence across Scotland, because we can ill afford to gamble with our young people’s future. A previous EIS survey found that more than half of classroom practitioners “do not feel confident in their own personal state of readiness”. The results of the latest EIS survey are even more worrying—70 per cent of respondents were “barely confident” or “not confident at all” about their department’s readiness to deliver the new qualifications on the current timescale, while less than 5 per cent of respondents were confident that their department could deliver the exams on time. Those figures are hugely significant and the Government needs to listen to the concerns that our teachers have expressed. Ann Ballinger, the Scottish Secondary Teachers Association’s general secretary, said that teachers were “in some distress” about the changes and that they were “hugely concerned that things are not going to be ready in time”. She repeated that concern on Tuesday night’s “Newsnight Scotland”. I am afraid that, rather than reassuring me and watching parents, the response to her from Terry Lanagan of the Association of Directors of Education served only to make me even more concerned.

I am sorry—I am very short of time. Parents are making the same comments and are—rightly—concerned for their children’s future. On BBC Radio Scotland’s “Call Kaye” programme, they branded the situation farcical, a shambles, a mess and a disaster. One parent who is also a teacher said: “My child is in S1 and I’m terrified about it. Colleagues there don’t even have the exam content yet. Farcical”. Another person said: “I don’t think that the teachers would be complaining like that if they didn’t have reason. There’s no smoke without fire.” These are real fears and concerns from real people, who need assurances that the system will be implemented properly and not rushed. We have spoken about East Renfrewshire, so I will not comment on that. The Scottish Secondary Teachers Association found that 45 per cent of respondents to a survey said that pupils in their schools were still making their subject choices at the end of second year, while 46 per cent were making their choices at the end of third year. There is no consistency, which is creating confusion. If a pupil moved from a local authority area that had delayed implementation to an area that had not delayed it, how would that affect that child’s education? We welcome the announcement of an Education Scotland audit and the extra support that will be offered to schools that need it. I urge the Government to act on the audit’s findings, to consider the evidence that is at hand, to listen to the concerns of parents and teachers and not to gamble with our young people’s future by railroading through the policy when schools are not ready for it.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive how many administrative and hotel services staff were employed by NHS Ayrshire and Arran in 2007 compared with 2012. (S4O-00761)

As the minister will know, the working tax credit changes that will come into force in April 2012 will mean that those who work for less than 24 hours a week will lose out on that much-needed benefit. Under agenda for change, in-house staff in the national health service should receive at least the living wage, but that is not always the case for contracted staff. I appreciate that working tax credit changes are not in the minister’s remit, but NHS pay and conditions are. What assurance can she give me that contracted staff who work in the NHS will receive decent pay and conditions? Does she agree that NHS boards should look to ensure that, regardless of whether they are contracted, all staff who work in the NHS receive at least the living wage?

It is a great privilege to take part in this first ever Scottish Government debate on climate justice. Christian Aid Scotland estimates that, if the average world temperature rises by just 2° by 2050, 250 million more people will be forced to leave their homes, a further 30 million people could go hungry as global agricultural yields go into recession and 1 to 3 billion people will suffer acute water shortages. Of course, those are worst-case scenarios but, in talking about climate change, we must stress that this very serious issue could drastically alter the ways in which people live their lives. According to the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, climate change will have a major effect on human wellbeing, causing hunger, displacement and social dislocation. We must not forget that this is a distinctly human issue. Scottish Labour pushed for radical action with the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, which requires the Government to meet the target of a 42 per cent cut in emissions by 2020. If we are going to meet the target, Scotland needs to redouble its efforts. Although emissions fell by 7 per cent in 2009, the Committee on Climate Change’s recent report attributed that to the recession rather than to any real action by the Scottish Government. It also found that, in 2010, the UK’s emissions rose by 3 per cent, and it suspects that the same will have occurred here, although the Scottish data are not yet available. We must question whether the Scottish Government is serious about the issue, given the reduction in its annual carbon emission targets from the proposed level of 3 per cent per annum to just 0.3 per cent in 2012. To Labour members, it does not look as if the Government is serious about climate change or is willing to take the radical steps that are required to deal with it. On climate change, we should be thinking globally but acting locally. In my area, the Big Lottery Fund has just awarded £99,800 to Eglinton Growers. That money will be used to create community gardens and more than 80 allotment plots, which will be available for the residents of Kilwinning and Irvine. As well as promoting health and wellbeing, the project is a practical example of sustainable communities and it embodies an idea that the Government should be promoting. I hope that it will do so through the climate justice fund that the minister announced earlier. We should be working with councils to ensure that, where possible, they are protecting the environment and sourcing food for schools locally. North Ayrshire Council catering department sources local produce, when that is possible. Last year, around 15.5 per cent of the total food spend was sourced from Ayrshire-based companies, and the council hopes to improve on that. It has also signed up to the carbon reduction commitment and the Carbon Saver Gold Standard, which involves reducing its carbon emissions over a three-year period. In addition, Labour-held North Ayrshire Council promotes eco-schools, which my colleague mentioned. Twenty-four schools have achieved silver awards and a further four have won bronze awards. At the 2010 Scottish education awards, Lawthorn primary in Irvine won the most sustainable school award for dramatically reducing the amount of energy, water and resources that it uses and its global footprint. It is important that we encourage climate change awareness in our children, because they will inherit the planet. On a wider scale, we must protect our peatlands. The West Scotland region as a whole has a lot of peatland. For example, Clyde Muirshiel park is 60 per cent peatland, and there are large areas of peatland on Arran. Such areas are vital for carbon capture, and it is essential that they remain wet to absorb the carbon. That could be under threat if our climate dries out. It is hard to believe that we could have a dry climate, but that is where we are heading. The International Union for Conservation of Nature estimated that, in 2010, Scotland’s peatland stored 3 billion tonnes of harmful gases and that about 80 per cent of the UK’s peatland area was in Scotland. If that land is not maintained there could be dire consequences for climate change, so we should maintain and protect as much peatland as possible. The Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment recently upset the farming industry with the Government’s commitment to increase woodland cover in Scotland to 25 per cent of the country’s landmass by 2050. He was forced to backtrack by describing what had been a target as an “aspiration”. Can the minister clarify whether the planting of 10,000 hectares with trees is a target or an aspiration? We need to ensure that Scotland is at the forefront of the fight on climate change, and the Government needs to ensure that it is serious about tackling climate change by reducing emissions and working with local authorities, public services, businesses and communities to ensure that everyone is doing their bit to tackle the issue effectively.

The cabinet secretary acknowledges that dumped tyres are an eyesore in rural areas. They present a significant health risk and encourage insect and rodent infestation. I look for his support in encouraging a campaign similar to those that he mentioned to be carried out throughout our rural areas and, perhaps, in other local authority areas.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what investment in its transport infrastructure North Ayrshire will receive in the next five years. (S4O-00739)

I thank the minister for that full answer. I have some concerns that some of the money for the Dalry bypass may have come from cancelling safety improvements to the Head Street and Barrmill Road junctions on the Beith bypass. Will the minister confirm that road safety has not been compromised to fund the project? According to Transport Scotland, the project will cost £28 million. Will the minister provide information on when it will start, given that the £10 million is intended to allow it to progress to the construction stage?

As we have heard many times this afternoon, human trafficking is an extremely serious issue—a form of modern slavery; the buying and selling of people. It is a global problem, yet it is occurring right here on our doorsteps. It takes many forms. Forced street crime, domestic servitude and sexual exploitation are just a few of the forms of abuse. It is heart wrenching to read accounts of those who have experienced the trade, people who have been sold into the trade by their own families, people who have had sons, daughters, brothers or sisters simply disappear, people forced into the sex trade and forced to endure psychological torture on a daily basis for years and people who have been forced into hard labour, working in dangerous conditions. They have no passport, no money and no hope of escape—if they escape, it could cost them their lives or the lives of people in their families. Stop the Traffik estimates that between 2 million and 4 million men, women and children are trafficked across borders and within their own country every year, and one person a minute is trafficked across borders. It is a trade that earns twice as much worldwide revenue as Coca Cola does. It is an organised crime on a massive scale and, according to the blue blindfold campaign, many criminal organisations are now switching from smuggling drugs to trafficking humans, as that is seen to be lower risk and to offer higher profits. How can we stand by while the selling of people into those kinds of abuse is seen to be a low-risk business? The first conviction in Scotland for the statutory offence of human trafficking was given on 9 September 2011. In England and Wales there had already been more than 150 prosecutions. An inquiry into human trafficking in Scotland was commissioned to find out why there was such a large difference. Was it not happening in Scotland? The report found that it is happening, as we have heard many times this afternoon, but it is unseen. It is critical to acknowledge that point so that we can start to tackle the extent of the problem. For example, any statistics regarding the issue need to be taken with a pinch of salt. The report states: “As a consequence, there are significant difficulties in obtaining a reliable estimate of how many victims of trafficking there are.” Hence, when committing resources to the problem, we cannot solely depend on the statistics that are available, as that would lead to undercommitting resources and would mean that we could not tackle the issue to its full extent. Organisations such as the TARA project in Glasgow try to help identify women who are involved in trafficking. In 2010-11, it provided support to 57 women, 56 of whom were new referrals. Twelve of the women received short-term support and 21 received long-term support. Seventy per cent were helped by the project to work with the police. Many women do not go the police, however, and are not even identified, which means that intelligence on this issue is lacking. Agencies must share information more systematically in order to improve performance on gathering intelligence, successful prosecutions and supporting victims. This is not a problem that can be tackled effectively by one agency; it needs a multi-agency approach. There needs to be more leadership from the Scottish Government on this issue and a victim-centric approach to human trafficking, with the focus on human rights and crime prevention. As many others have said this afternoon, it is important that that approach should be adopted before the Commonwealth games, as large events tend to increase activity, as was the case in Athens in 2004. Given the low conviction rate, the Government should consider coming forward with a new human trafficking act, so that the crime of trafficking can be tackled head-on, rather than being lumped together with other forms of serious crime, which means that we have to depend on several acts to deal with the issue. The new act should be developed through work carried out alongside the United Kingdom Government. That would allow Scotland to have dedicated legislation relating to human trafficking, give clarity on which practices fall under that heading and enable easier prosecution of those involved. Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People, Tam Baillie, published “Scotland—A safe place for child traffickers?”. In it, he recommends that the Scottish Government should revise its now outdated guidance on safeguarding children in Scotland who may have been trafficked, and support and co-ordinate training and awareness-raising programmes about trafficking for all relevant professionals, including those in social work, the police, education and health. The reports that are mentioned in the motion make harrowing reading, and it appears that Scotland has so far failed to tackle human trafficking successfully or effectively. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to implement the recommendations in the reports and call on the Government to do so before the Commonwealth games in 2014.

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the recent poll by Ipsos MORI, which found not only that politicians are the people whom the public least trust to give information about climate change but that a staggering 50 per cent of people do not believe that climate change will make a difference to their lives. Does he agree that we have a long way to go in persuading the public of the importance of taking environmental issues seriously? What programmes is the Scottish Government developing, and with what funding, to raise awareness of the issue?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. We should make no mistake: in Scotland, we have a crisis on our hands when it comes to youth unemployment. According to the document, more than 100,000 18 to 24-year-olds are out of work—little wonder that so many young people feel that they have no hope and no future. North Ayrshire has a youth unemployment rate of 30.3 per cent, which is one of the highest rates in the country, although the council is doing everything that it can to reverse the trend. For example, it is directly employing twice as many apprentices this year—a total of 90—as well as subsidising local employers who take on young people and providing mentoring schemes to help young people into work. However, it is restricted in what it can do because of the Government cuts of 23 per cent over the next three years. What additional specific support is being given to councils in areas of extremely high youth unemployment? I welcome the publication of the Government’s youth employment strategy. Worryingly, however, I found at least three instances in the document of the Government making a veiled reference to separatism. The document is not the place to promote the SNP’s separatist agenda and I find that extremely disrespectful to the youth of Scotland. The Parliament should focus on what it can do now, not on what it might be able to do in the future if it had more responsibilities. We need positive action now to eradicate youth unemployment. For a start, the Scottish Government could reverse the £33.3 million of cuts in one year that amount to 6 per cent of college budgets. Those cuts are counterproductive when we are trying to tackle youth unemployment. I acknowledge the announcement of further funding for support for students but ask whether that will be targeted specifically at colleges in areas of high unemployment. We need to invest in young people and equip them with the right skills so that they can progress in the workplace and make a contribution to Scottish society. Young people are not a homogeneous group, so I am glad that the strategy document recognises that. There is no one-size-fits-all solution. We need a range of options, from apprenticeships to college and university places. We need to work with the public, private and third sectors and the UK Government to tackle the issue head on and reverse the current trend. The commitment to 25,000 modern apprenticeships this year is a start. However, when I submitted written questions to ask what progress had been made towards meeting the target, I was referred to Skills Development Scotland, which told me that I would have to wait until April 2012 for the figures to be collated. As far as I am concerned, that is not an acceptable response. We need an emphasis on the retention of apprentices after their apprenticeship is finished, so that people feel valued, rather than just a temporary stopgap for an employer, which an apprenticeship can often feel like. I suggest that a fair employment commission be established to oversee employer activity, investigate complaints and take enforcement action against rogue employers. We should look to all three sectors to steadily increase the rate of apprenticeships and ensure that funding is in place for that to happen. The Tories in Westminster have done us no favours by abolishing the future jobs fund, which helped to get young people back into work. I welcome the minister’s announcement that funding for the community jobs Scotland scheme will continue beyond March this year and run until 2013, but it should go further. The scheme has been extremely successful and has created 2,000 positions. According to the SCVO, 1,356 jobs have been filled, 132 are at interview stage and a further 512 positions are waiting to be filled. That shows the capacity that the third sector has to deliver. Therefore, I support the extension of the scheme and would welcome an increase in its future funding to the level for the current year. To solve this crisis—and it is a crisis—we need all sectors, bodies and Governments to come together to develop innovative solutions and strategies. We need to ensure that apprenticeships remain in place, and we must increase their number across all sectors. We need continued investment in the community jobs scheme. We need to reverse the damaging and punitive cuts to the college sector to ensure that our young people develop the proper skills for today so that they can take Scotland forward into the future.

9. To ask the Scottish Executive what services will be lost when prison visiting committees are replaced with an independent advocacy service. (S4O-00637)

My question has been superseded by this morning’s debate. The cabinet secretary said that a lot of prisoners do not know about the service. Surely, that is a failing in the system and we should do more to promote the visiting committees rather than replace that first-class service, which is praised overall in the consultation. Although I support the advocacy service, I think that it should be run in conjunction with the prison visiting committees and should not replace them. Does the minister not agree that we need a body that monitors prisons and checks on prisoner welfare independently of the Scottish Prison Service?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate because I have been active in my region in discussing the issues around broadband. Within North Ayrshire, 12.9 per cent of people still get less than 2 megabits, broadband uptake is only 58 per cent and there is no access to superfast broadband. I am concerned that broadband uptake in Scotland seems to have stalled. Ofcom’s “Communications Market Report: Scotland” of 2011 shows that since quarter 1 of 2009, broadband uptake in Scotland has remained at 61 per cent, which is 13 per cent behind the UK average. Although that is discussed in the Government’s infrastructure plan, the plan is very vague on how the Scottish Government will get uptake increasing again. The infrastructure plan is ambitious but I wonder how feasible it is—especially given that the “Communications Market Report: Scotland” states that 50 per cent of premises in Scotland are in postcode areas in which high-speed broadband is available, and that that could increase to around 60 per cent by 2014. The plan promises significant uplift in speeds for everyone by 2015, with a target of 40 to 80 megabits for between 85 and 90 per cent of users. I and many others would welcome that and look forward to it, if it happens. However, if there is only going to be a 10 per cent increase to at least 24 megabits in two years, I fail to see how that can be increased in a single year for 85 and 90 per cent of users while tripling or quadrupling speeds. The plan is silent on how the target will be achieved, so I would welcome an explanation from the cabinet secretary. Recently BT announced that most BT exchanges would be upgraded by 2014 to provide next-generation broadband in my area. However, we need to ensure that when the exchanges are upgraded, the wiring is also upgraded because how far someone is from the exchange is a major factor in the speed of the broadband that they receive. Even so, the upgrading does not often happen in areas that have little market potential or which are rural and hard to reach. That is one of the main reasons why we have seen continued investment in the same areas leading to some households being able to connect to 40 megabits, while others get only 2 megabits from the same exchange. We need to shift away from that model and upgrade Scotland’s broadband infrastructure more equally. I am glad to see that the infrastructure plan acknowledges that, but it contains very little about how it will be achieved. Being left behind is a real concern for rural areas. According to the new Ofcom report, the level of rural broadband penetration is 84 per cent in England, 68 per cent in Scotland and 67 per cent in Wales. That is good, but it is still not good enough.

It was urban areas that I was referring to when I mentioned copper wiring. The distance someone is from the exchange is the real issue—broadband degrades the further away people are from the exchange. I recently met a company that used to specialise in providing wind-farm sites with broadband, which has started to shift its model to benefit the domestic consumer. It uses a form of wireless technology. In simple terms, it functions in a similar way to the mobile telephone network and can provide rural communities with broadband speed of 20 megabits. Members of one community in my area, Cunninghamhead, benefit from the service and are delighted with it but, so far, because the company is such a small business, it has not been able to expand into other areas. Such technology seems to be a promising alternative to wire-based internet and one that would benefit rural and hard-to-reach areas if it received an initial subsidy from the Scottish Government. It would be beneficial if the Scottish Government could look into providing subsidies for such options in order to speed up the penetration of broadband into rural areas and to allow providers to offer fast and stable connections at low cost. We cannot afford to leave parts of Scotland behind in the digital revolution. We must do more to ensure that the uptake of broadband starts moving again. As more and more of our services are accessed online, it is becoming much more important that we invest in and improve Scotland’s broadband infrastructure. The UK as a whole has been extremely slow in upgrading the infrastructure in comparison with other countries, which are leaps and bounds ahead of us. It is important that we explore all our options when it comes to providing broadband to rural areas. I hope that we can start to shift away from providing broadband through the old copper-wiring model, which I mentioned earlier.

I understand that it will be a difficult task to upgrade and connect all of Scotland but, as I said, we cannot afford to be left behind.

11. To ask the Scottish Executive how many full-time teachers are in post and how this compares with 2007. (S4O-00619)

The cut in teacher numbers is worrying. It is even more concerning, given that, as members know, the General Teaching Council for Scotland said that only 20.5 per cent of new teachers had found permanent work, which was a decrease on the figure of 25.5 per cent that was recorded for 2008-09, and that 16.6 per cent could not find any work at all. Supply teaching is no longer an attractive option because of the pay cuts, which mean that supply teachers earn £78 per day, before tax. In the light of falling teacher numbers, what will the Government do to ensure that a job is available for newly qualified teachers? Right now, the Government is failing them.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive how it supports people with multiple sclerosis. (S4O-00552)

What plans are in place for measuring health boards’ performance against the clinical standards for neurological health services after the implementation programme ends in March 2012?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in the debate. During the past few months, I have received more than 1,000 e-mails from students and lecturers across the west of Scotland about cuts to colleges. NUS Scotland has been direct in its “our future, our fight” campaign to stop cuts to the further education sector. My staff and I have been doing our best to reply to every e-mail that has come in. I wonder whether the cabinet secretary could tell the chamber whether he has received such e-mails and whether he has replied to them. I am also interested to know exactly what his response has been and whether he could provide the chamber with a copy of it. Improving outcomes for all young people is possible only if they are fully equipped, and I am afraid that they are not. Cuts to college budgets, teachers being made redundant, broken promises on class sizes and on delivering access to a fully qualified nursery teacher for every child are just some of the barriers that result from the Government’s failures. Colleges in Scotland provide services to some of the most disadvantaged and deprived areas in Scotland. During the past few years, the SNP Government’s failure to protect college funding has resulted in mergers, cuts in the number of lecturers and courses, cuts in student services, and a lower number of applicants for further and higher education in Scotland. [Interruption.] I am sorry if I am boring Mr Russell. Colleges are a means of widening access to education for those who need further vocational skills or who are not ready to take the step up to university.

We are talking about what is happening now. If Mike Russell wishes Scotland to be a world leader in education, why is he making it more difficult for young people to get to college? Yes, the education is free and I fully support that, but there is no point in having free education if someone cannot get a place on the course of their choice in the area of their choice as a result of the 20 per cent cuts to college funding.

I have to make progress. It is not only future students who will suffer. Current students have seen student services, such as counselling, withdrawn. Many students who require counselling services have to wait longer to speak to someone about the stresses of college life, money worries, or family-related problems, or to someone who will support them through their course. Students who need such a service often end up dropping out of college at a greater cost to themselves and the education system.

I am afraid that I am not dreaming; I am talking about reality. We have seen college attainment figures drop during the past few years and that is no surprise, when students no longer receive the necessary support for the duration of their courses. The SNP has failed not only college students. School pupils are being let down, and have been since 2007. Teachers in Scotland, as in all countries around the world, play a pivotal role in the future of young people. They are not only educators, but mentors, role models and carers. Why have teacher numbers fallen over the past five years? Why are 80 per cent of post-probationer teachers without full-time employment? We have talked about improving outcomes for learners. Surely everyone can see that we are even failing newly qualified teachers. The outcome of their learning has been unemployment or work in a non-teaching post, such as stacking shelves in a supermarket. The Scottish Government must take not only the appropriate action to improve outcomes for learners, but more action to improve chances for children before they enter primary school. To its credit, it has identified the early years as an important area that needs more investment. I fully support it in that but, this week, child poverty statistics showed how much more needs to be done. I acknowledge that it will take many initiatives to rid Scotland of child poverty. One that relates to early years and learning and can be implemented concerns nursery places. More free nursery places with fully trained teachers and staff are needed for young children in disadvantaged areas. In parts of North Ayrshire, one child in three lives below the poverty line. Two council wards have child poverty rates of more than 30 per cent: Irvine East with 33 per cent and Saltcoats and Stevenson with 35 per cent. That is unacceptable in modern Scotland. The Parliament must take more action on those issues to improve the life chances of our children.

I, too, thank Margaret Burgess for highlighting this incredibly important issue. The recent R3 report that is mentioned in the motion found that 45 per cent of the population struggled to make it to pay day without running out of money and that 3.5 million adults have considered using a pay day loan, particularly around this time of year. Such loans are marketed as a quick fix but come at a high cost. Far from being a quick fix, they trap a person in debt so that they can afford to pay off only the interest rather than the debt itself. People turn to such loans in times of need, only to find that they are unsustainable. The debt starts to spiral out of control, and debtors often face homelessness when they cannot pay their rent or mortgage. As the motion states, some interest rates on pay day loans can be 5,000 per cent APR. Unlike other countries, the UK currently has no cap on how high such rates can be. The pay day loan industry, which is worth more than £2 billion, seems to be concerned only with profits and shows no concern for people’s lives or for the pressures that it inflicts. Is it any wonder that such companies are banned in the USA and some other countries? They target the vulnerable. As Labour MP Stella Creasy said when she introduced the Consumer Credit (Regulation and Advice) Bill, those legal loan sharks circle our communities smelling blood. With even tougher cuts and threats to the welfare system on the way, we need to start doing more to tackle this important issue. I support the motion, which urges the UK Government to introduce tougher regulation for pay day loan companies by capping interest rates and re-examining the system of crisis loans, as there is clearly a flaw in the present system. Alternatively, it could ban such companies outright, as the USA did. Although it is difficult for the Scottish Parliament to act on the issue—as it is a complex and mainly reserved matter—we still have tools at our disposal. Pay day loans should come with a Government health warning that dispels the myth that they are a quick fix. We also need to inform people of alternative sources of affordable credit, such as credit unions, which will be the key to tackling the issue. Alternative sources are not well publicised, and many pay day loan companies would prefer that it remained that way, as any alternative would threaten their profits. We must not forget that pay day loans are a business, but they are a nasty business that preys on peoples’ misfortune. A reliable source has told me that pay day loan companies make it difficult for debtors to have a credit union settle the debt and that they do not like third-party interference. However, giving credit unions more powers and increasing their involvement would benefit everyone involved. As has been mentioned, 1st Alliance (Ayrshire) Credit Union has a lot of experience in dealing with the issue, having consolidated numerous pay day loans that range from £400 to more than £3,000. That cuts down payments and interest rates considerably. Credit unions have been instrumental in ridding our communities of loan sharks. Now, we need their support to tackle the legal loan sharks. It is unbelievable that there is more regulation and red tape around the business of credit unions than around the business of these exploitative companies. I am happy to work with the Scottish Government to help credit unions to explore and develop solutions, because the situation demands action now.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what its plans are for prison visiting committees. (S4O-00536)

Many people in my region have asked me to raise the issue and share their concerns about the development. Prison visiting committees should be independent local bodies, and they were widely praised in the consultation process, so why disband them? Who would be in charge of appointing the new independent prisoner advocacy service and monitoring its progress? Who would it be accountable to, and how would it be funded?

In response to an earlier question, the cabinet secretary agreed that the high discard level was an issue. Can he expand on the Scottish Government’s plans for further cod avoidance measures to tackle the high discard level?

The full infrastructure investment plan makes a very interesting read if members like fairy stories. Never-never land comes to mind, as there is very little that is new, timescales are vague or non-existent and more than half of the projects have no funding mechanism attached to them. I welcome the commitments to funding for the Scottish Futures Trust to work with North Ayrshire Council and others on the development and delivery of their residual and food waste treatment projects, as well as the commitment for the North Ayrshire community hospital. However, no real timescale is placed on those. There is talk in the document of a western subsea link between Hunterston and Deeside, but it is not confirmed and is only being considered—part of the dream experience. I await with much anticipation the Scottish ministers’ response to the application for a carbon capture storage plant at Hunterston, because the document reiterates that the Government is “deeply disappointed with the UK Government’s decision not to fund the CCS project at Longannet. This is an enormous lost opportunity for both Scotland and the UK to become World leaders in development and deployment of CCS technology.” Having made that statement, will the Government respect the decision of North Ayrshire Council and the 20,000 people who petitioned against the project, including the local SNP MSP, and remove the Hunterston coal-fired project from the national planning framework? Clarification on the Government’s policy on coal-fired power station plants would be appreciated. Like my colleagues in North Ayrshire, I am relieved to see that the document acknowledges that urban regeneration companies “play an important part in delivering the large-scale transformation of the areas in which they operate.” Irvine Bay URC has played a major part in the regeneration of Ardrossan and Saltcoats and the UK Roses design award-winning regeneration of Kilwinning Main Street and its plans to regenerate Irvine town centre will provide not only an economic and aesthetic boost to the area but training places for local people. I welcome the announcement on 8 December that funding has been guaranteed until the end of 2014. I hope that the Government will fulfil that commitment and look to extend it back to the original 10-year commitment. On the subject of commitments not being fulfilled, I refer the chamber to the 21 October edition of the Ardrossan & Saltcoats Herald in which Kenneth Gibson commits the SNP Government to building the Dalry bypass in this session. I have read and reread the Government’s plan and have seen no mention of any upgrades to the A737. The issue has been raised time and again, but no progress has been made. Did the local MSP just make it up? Is this road ever going to be upgraded? People in North Ayrshire desperately need an upgraded A737 that will give them a fast and safe route into Glasgow and beyond, opening up employment opportunities and increasing their life chances. I am willing to work with local MSPs, North Ayrshire Council and the Government to establish a definite timescale for the A737. The communities of North Ayrshire deserve to be given at least a date for when the work is programmed to start; after all, the issue has been on-going since the previous session and still there is no resolution in sight. Will it happen in this session, in the next session or not until after 2030? I also looked in vain to see whether the Edinburgh and Glasgow airport rail links were mentioned. However, there is nothing—not a word—about them. We have lost an opportunity to put in place a vital economic link for those airports. Although I welcome the developments for North Ayrshire that have been listed, I want to see dedicated funding and timescales. Many of these schemes have appeared in plans time and again, but they still have not materialised. Why should the chamber and the people of Scotland believe that this time will be any different? If this is a complete list of all future infrastructure investment projects, the people of North Ayrshire will be very disappointed to find that, despite Kenneth Gibson’s commitment, there are still no plans to upgrade the A737, no timescale for such work and no funding allocated to it. I urge the Government to make some progress and at least set out a properly funded, realistic programme of when we can expect these projects to be implemented.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what additional funding it will provide to colleges that deliver higher education courses. (S4O-00459)

The minister has not answered the question about whether funding will be provided to colleges for higher education. That is quite concerning, because a number of colleges in my region have indicated to me that they provide up to 20 per cent of higher education courses. Given the numerous cuts to college budgets that have already been made, does the minister envisage colleges cutting back on higher education courses that they currently provide and focusing solely on the provision of further education courses? If so, will that not limit the choice of students, whereas the Government claims that its reforms will increase choice and add progression?

I draw the Parliament’s attention to the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee meeting of 9 November, at which the Minister for Housing and Transport almost admitted that the SNP made a mistake when it committed in its manifesto to building 6,000 social rented houses a year. We all know that that has changed to 6,000 affordable new houses a year. As we have heard repeatedly, that is a different thing from social rented houses. Why is it so hard for the Government to admit that it made a mistake and could not deliver what it originally promised in its manifesto? As I have said in previous debates, housing is the single biggest loser in the draft budget. Still, no action has been taken to correct that. The Government will cut funding by 63 per cent over the spending review period, but the number of affordable houses that are to be built will be cut by 16 per cent. Does that mean that the quality of the houses that are built will suffer?

I am sorry. I have no time to take interventions. Will higher rents be charged in the long term to recover the cost? The registered social landlord subsidy has been cut from £77,000 in 2009 to £40,000 this year. Much higher rents are likely to be charged to cover borrowing costs. Shelter argues that, although that is a viable short to medium-term solution, extending it over a longer period would mean significant rent increases. Has the Government carried out affordability tests to gauge whether the likely increase in rents will be within hard-pressed tenants’ means? That is even before the new housing benefit reforms come in. Less funding for new social rented homes is, of course, having a detrimental effect on the construction industry, which employs 127,000 people in Scotland.

I am sorry, but I just do not have time to take interventions. The construction industry involves a further 63,000 self-employed people. Between April and June, 10,000 Scottish construction workers lost their jobs and a total of 30,000 jobs have been lost since March 2009. The fall in the number of houses that are built not only reduces the supply of new housing but puts people’s jobs and livelihoods at risk. While youth unemployment is at its highest level since 1994, the Government is reducing the availability of modern apprenticeship places in construction. That is, of course, a major blow to modern apprenticeships, because between April and December 2010, 32 per cent of all modern apprenticeships were completed in the construction industry. I ask the Government again whether it thinks that it is wise to put further pressure on the construction industry and to put the economy at risk by hitting housing so hard. It is not just housing that will be affected by the cuts—they will have far-reaching social consequences. In the past few weeks, the Government’s response to criticism of the budget has been to ask Labour members for alternatives. Has the Government considered using the £67 million in Barnett consequentials that were gained from the English council-tax freeze to boost the supply of affordable social housing? I again urge the Government to re-examine the draft housing budget. We urgently need to breathe life into the construction industry and to get it back on its feet. If we do not, more jobs and more modern apprenticeship places will be lost and the construction industry will be deskilled. Housing is a basic human need and the Government must give it priority.

I will use my time to discuss the reduction in the number of police support staff and the backlog of court cases, both of which I consider to undermine the justice system in Scotland and show the Government playing politics with community safety. As of 30 June this year, there were 7,109 police staff in Scotland, which is a fall of 732 since June last year according to a response to a parliamentary question asked by Johann Lamont. I seek assurance from the Government that if the planned single police force goes ahead, those numbers will not fall any further. In a written question to the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, I asked whether there will be further support staff job losses. He replied: “Final decisions on civilian staff numbers will be a matter for the leadership of the new service to determine based on operational requirements.”—[Official Report, Written Answers, 1 November 2011; S4W-03409.] Is that another case of the Scottish National Party cutting budgets then leaving the service providers to pick up the backlash from the public when services are cut? We need to know just what effect the cuts to staff so far will have on front-line services. How many officers are being taken off front-line duty to carry out work that was previously done by support staff?

I am sorry, but I do not have time to take interventions. Many police forces are suggesting that if they receive any more cuts to their budget they will no longer be able to do their job effectively and it will be unsustainable for them to meet the Government’s pledge to keep an additional 1,000 police officers on the front line. Without a doubt, the cuts will have an effect on communities across Scotland and will lead to reductions in the number of police on the beat, affect the ability of the police to handle emergency calls and increase response times—or, in the case of some less serious incidents, mean that police will not be able to respond at all. The problem is further complicated by backroom staff cuts in our court system, where there is already a considerable backlog of court cases. As of October, there were 14,000 unmarked cases compared with 7,000 only six months ago, an increase of 100 per cent, and 4,300 of those cases have gone over the four-week target. I am greatly concerned that if the trend continues, many of the cases will not be heard and criminals will be let off without trial. That situation is not helped by the recruitment freeze in the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service, which has resulted in none of last year’s trainees being employed at the end of their training contract. To have such delays in the processing of offences undermines public confidence in Scotland’s justice system and, combined with the cuts in police support staff, could put public safety at risk. I call on the Government to give assurances today that police support staff numbers under a single police force will be maintained. Maintaining support staff numbers is vital to keeping police on the streets fighting crime, and any cuts to support staff will have a detrimental effect on community safety.

16. To ask the Scottish Executive what the total cost of the council tax freeze between 2007 and 2016 will be. (S4O-00353)

That £630 million is a false economy in that most households have saved an average of 50p per week but have lost more in the cuts to services that councils provide.

Households are losing out on services such as sheltered housing wardens and school clubs. Would it not have been better if the £630 million had been invested in national health service nurses, colleges, funding for local government and infrastructure?

I welcome the opportunity to speak in this Scottish Government debate on veterans. I pay tribute to the brave men and women who currently serve in our armed forces as well as all the veterans who have served in past and present conflicts. The British Legion representatives in Kilwinning, where I live, drew to my attention the fact that there is no Ministry of Defence hospital unit in Scotland. There are only five in the United Kingdom, and they are all based in England. That means that Scottish families of injured service personnel have huge distances to travel. Although they get financial assistance, that only applies to immediate family and does not include extended family members. An MOD hospital in Scotland would make life much easier for injured personnel and their families. It would help to speed up their recovery and, hence, reduce their time in hospital. The United Kingdom Government has, so far, seemed sympathetic to the idea of basing an MOD hospital unit in Scotland, and Liam Fox confirmed that one would be built here. I hope that the Scottish Government is also supportive and that it will engage with and encourage NHS boards to ensure that a strong bid is submitted as part of the tendering process in 2013.

I am pleased to hear that and welcome the minister’s comment. However, as many members know, the care that Ministry of Defence hospital units offer is not available to veterans as, once they leave the forces, the MOD no longer provides their care. [Interruption.] Members must excuse me, as I have a head cold. The care that veterans receive usually falls to charitable organisations such as Combat Stress, about which we have already heard, and Erskine homes due to the complex and varied nature of the conditions from which veterans suffer and the care that they require. Scotland has an estimated 400,000 veterans and the number grows by around 2,500 each year. Not every veteran in Scotland requires care, but many do, and they often require specialised treatment programmes. It is worrying to note that many remain untreated or are wrongly diagnosed, which complicates matters for them. Combat Stress, which has been much lauded this morning, found that 81 per cent of the veterans who responded to its survey and who suffer from poor mental health feel ashamed or are too embarrassed to raise the issue. One in three failed to tell their family because of the fear of stigma or discrimination. As a result, they are reluctant to raise the issue with their GP or others who could offer them help. I was pleased to hear the minister say that the Government is working closely with GPs. Could the Government look into the feasibility of identifying ex-service personnel in their GPs’ medical records? Such an approach would mean that the veterans could be referred to specialised services more quickly, as many GPs find it hard to identify the issues that military personnel face. It would also be beneficial to provide GPs with more education about military-related post-traumatic stress disorder. Combat Stress has a treatment centre in Ayrshire that receives £1.2 million from the Scottish Government. That is only 60 per cent of its overall funding; the rest is raised through donations. The Scottish Government also funds one of Combat Stress’s two community outreach teams, which provide care to veterans in their own homes. Veterans who live in remote parts of Scotland, such as the Western Isles and northern Scotland, are more at risk, because many of them miss out on care and support. A holistic approach to treating veterans is urgently needed to ensure that they and their families are provided with the most comprehensive support possible. I ask the Government to consider supporting the rolling out of Combat Stress’s six-week treatment scheme. That scheme helps veterans who have the severest forms of post-traumatic stress disorder, which often leads to depression and substance or alcohol abuse. It provides highly structured treatment programmes that are tailored to those who are most in need. A lot of good work is being done, but there is still a lot more to do. Unfortunately, time constraints have meant that I could not talk about all the issues this morning. I urge the Government to support the establishment of an MOD hospital. I was pleased to hear about work on that and I look forward to progress being made. I ask the Government to develop a more holistic approach that provides a comprehensive support system, so that veterans and their families can access treatment and support easily and no longer feel stigmatised in doing so.

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the member agree that the minister should publicise more the solar panel schemes that are available, whereby householders benefit by gaining up to £250 towards their electricity costs over a year at no cost to them?

I recognise that this has been the toughest spending review since devolution. However, this Government has the majority to enable it to carry out its manifesto commitments and I urge it to fulfil its housing commitments. I welcome the grants that have been provided to the council and other housing providers in the North Ayrshire area for such social housing projects as the third phase of the Vineburgh project and the construction of a further 37 council houses in Kilwinning and Millport. However, there are still 5,900 people on North Ayrshire Council’s housing list and 766 people presented themselves as homeless last year. The last time that I spoke about housing, I urged the Scottish Government to make housing a priority and confirm that the budget for housing and regeneration would not be diminished. However, it seems that my pleas fell on deaf ears, and funding has been drastically cut. The housing and regeneration budget is clearly not a priority for the SNP Government. Capital investment to affordable housing has been cut by 19 per cent in the first year and, once earlier adjustments are taken into account, that is a 30 per cent cut. That falls to almost 50 per cent in the second year. According to Shelter, housing is the single biggest loser in the draft budget. It appears that housing is being pushed further and further down the priorities of this Government, which is of great concern to me.

No. I am sorry, but I do not have time. The SNP’s election manifesto promised that the SNP would build 6,000 new social rented houses each year, and one of its flagship manifesto commitments was to build 30,000 new social rented homes during the next five years. The point that we are making this morning is about social rented houses. We have heard that it will, in fact, be 20,000 social rented houses, which is a drop of 10,000 in just a few months. Those pledges were made in full knowledge of the hard times that we face. The Scottish Government knew how much money it would have available when it made those promises. However, based on the money that was made available in the spending review and the draft budget, the Government’s manifesto commitments seem to be impossible to sustain. Shelter Scotland and the Chartered Institute of Housing stated: “The SNP Government’s flagship manifesto commitment on affordable housing is set to be its first big failure unless there is a radical rethink of spending priorities”. Fewer funds will also have a detrimental effect on the construction industry and the associated jobs. Between April and June this year, 10,000 Scottish construction jobs were lost, and a total of 30,000 jobs have been lost since March 2009. Does the Government think that it is wise to put further pressure on the construction industry and put the economic recovery at risk by hitting housing and regeneration so hard? It seems that, as demand for new affordable housing is rising, supply is falling. The Government will struggle to meet even half of the target to supply 6,000 social rented houses this year, especially given the fact that so few developments have been approved, even though the Government has changed the accounting method that it used in previous years by doing some jiggery-pokery. The spending review is a blow to the 156,000 families and households that have been waiting for years for a home of their own. That is all the more true because the Government signed up to the commitment made by the Labour Party in 2003 that all unintentionally homeless households would be entitled to settled accommodation by 2012. I fail to see how that target can be met, especially considering that the number of people who live in temporary accommodation rose by 3 per cent during the past year alone, and continues to rise. That is even before the new housing benefit rules come into play. I urge the Scottish Government to reconsider the budget. There is room for manoeuvre. In particular, there is an urgent need to re-examine the second and third years of the draft budget proposal, or I predict that the Government will not meet its targets on social housing and will be shown to have failed to achieve its election commitment to the people of Scotland.

I am sorry; I must continue because I am in my final minute. The Scottish Government will have failed to provide growth in the construction industry and it will have failed every homeless person in Scotland, all during this year in office.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to meet the Scottish Environment Protection Agency to discuss the European bathing water directive. (S4O-00218)

As I am sure the minister is aware, some beaches are granted abnormal weather waivers if they fail water-quality tests following heavy rain. Those waivers are given predominantly to east-coast beaches, rather than west-coast beaches, because of the reliance on rainfall data, which is difficult to obtain for some local areas. Does the minister agree that more transparency is needed about how waivers are granted and about the data that is used in considering whether to grant a waiver?

5. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to address the impact on schools with higher than average returns of S5 and S6 pupils. (S4O-00158)

Yesterday the Scottish Government committed to providing a minimum income of £7,000 to lowest-income students. Will the Government clarify whether that replaces or is additional to the £6,200 that the Student Awards Agency for Scotland provides? What incentives will such a payment provide for students to stay on at school, if they would be financially better off going to college?

I welcome the opportunity to raise a few issues that I feel are missing from the economic strategy. They are about employment and how the Scottish Government can stimulate the economy by attracting new businesses to areas of high unemployment. As members might be aware, North Ayrshire was recently rated just behind Glasgow in a list of areas in the UK that have the worst job prospects. In North Ayrshire, 27.6 per cent of households are without work and, to make matters worse, the area has the highest youth unemployment figures in Scotland. We hear from the Scottish Government that more people are in employment and that more jobs become available each day. However, in the past year, full-time employment has been falling while the number of people who are in part-time positions has been rising. The number of people claiming jobseekers allowance rose by 2,600 from June to July and the number of 18 to 24-year-olds claiming benefit is at its highest since February 1997. I must ask where all those jobs are. There is an increase in jobs in cities, with Amazon creating 900 jobs in Edinburgh, for example. That is obviously a welcome development for the overall Scottish economy, but it fails to help and stimulate areas that really need it, such as North Ayrshire, where, on average, 12 people compete for every vacancy.

Give me a second. The Scottish Government must provide incentives for business to invest in areas where unemployment is highest and has been at high levels for years. It is certain that areas are ignored and skipped over for investment. If we allow those areas to fall through the net, we run the risk of communities never getting back on their feet. We need to focus the recovery on economic black spots, rather than continually investing in areas where employment rates are not an issue.

If the council is responsible for the situation in North Ayrshire, why are we having this conversation? This is where the economy is set. Enterprise zones are not the answer, because 80 per cent of the jobs that they create tend to be displaced from other areas, rather than new jobs. Although the zones provide short-term growth, they do not provide long-term and sustainable investment, which is what is required. The Government needs to focus on the long-term issues, rather than on short-term measures that are likely to move jobs around and which have little sustained impact on the economy. North Ayrshire would benefit economically from better transport links. For example, traffic on the A737 exceeds its capacity. The road is on the programme to be upgraded, but there is no timescale. That vital link must be upgraded now. Free-flowing traffic would make the area more attractive to business investors and would open up north Ayrshire to the much-heralded 20,000 jobs that were spoken about as coming from the completion of the M74. The report on “Scotland’s Digital Future: a strategy for Scotland” states that the Scottish Government wants next-generation broadband to be rolled out to all by 2020 “with significant progress being made by 2015”. However, according to the Office of Communications report, in north Ayrshire, next-generation broadband is not available. If we are to attract businesses into such areas, we must provide them with access to fast and stable broadband. I call on the Government to be more specific about how it will give priority to areas in which there are high levels of unemployment, particularly youth unemployment. We need long-term solutions that encourage sustainable growth, rather than promoting short-term gains. The Government must also provide better transport and digital links to attract business investment to unemployment black spots.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his opening remarks and congratulate him and the minister on their promotion. I welcome Lewis Macdonald to his new role. In April this year, the charity Shelter stated that 160,000 people in Scotland are waiting for local authority homes. Members will agree that that is a truly shocking figure. Housing is a basic economic need. Without decent housing, a child’s life chances diminish alarmingly. At present, one in five children in Scotland lives in houses that have either condensation or dampness, or both, which increases their risk of suffering from asthma and other respiratory illnesses. One in 10 children in Scotland lives in housing that is overcrowded. How can a child study for an exam or complete homework when they live in such disadvantaged circumstances? I ask the new cabinet secretary why that issue has been overlooked by the Government and always left at the bottom of the policy agenda, when it is vital to so many people in Scotland.

I do not have time. In the previous session, housing was in the health portfolio; now it is shoehorned into transport. The Government has continuously pushed housing further down the agenda. Scotland needs new houses, yet with a 20.8 per cent decline in the housing and regeneration budget, the Government seems loth to provide them. The Chartered Institute of Housing in Scotland believes that the Scottish Government may already be suppressing next year’s housing budget by reducing the number of approvals for new housing to be built for social landlords. That action would result in default shrinkage in the housing and regeneration budget. Can the cabinet secretary confirm that the budget for housing and regeneration will not diminish? In North Ayrshire, where I am still a councillor, a recent assessment found a 2,700 shortfall in the number of houses that are needed in that council area. The Labour-held council has taken steps to tackle that. We have created a new housing development investment programme that is designed specifically to target support to the most vulnerable people in the area. We have also developed our housing revenue account business plan, which will guarantee that 1 per cent of the rent increase will go directly into the building of new council houses. That will translate into 50 new houses a year for the next decade. Those are real solutions to real housing need. Despite the difficult circumstances in which we find ourselves due to year-on-year cuts to the affordable housing investment programme, Labour is working to ensure that we see more investment in social housing.

I am sorry, but I do not have time. There are even areas in which we are working with the Scottish Government. For example, there has been massive investment to regenerate Vineburgh, in Irvine. That project shows how councils, community housing associations and the Scottish Government can work together to improve the life chances of tenants through transforming communities. However, although the Scottish Government provided housing association grant for the first two phases of the development, I would like an assurance from the cabinet secretary that the funding will be made available for phase 3 to allow the project to be completed. During my time in the Scottish Parliament, housing will be my priority. I urge the Scottish Government to make housing its priority, too.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I offer my congratulations on your new position. I offer my congratulations also to new members on the quality of their maiden speeches over the past few weeks. I pay tribute to the members of the former West of Scotland region who stood down at the election or were not returned to the Parliament, in particular, Irene Oldfather. She was on the European and External Relations Committee and its predecessor committees during all her time at Holyrood and she was that committee’s convener for two sessions. Irene also sat on the cross-party group on Alzheimer’s. I thank her, on behalf of the people of Cunninghame South, for her stoic work over the past 12 years. I am proud to have been elected to represent West Scotland in the Scottish Parliament and I thank the voters for their support. I have served as a councillor for Kilwinning in Labour-held North Ayrshire for the past 12 years. It has been a great privilege to represent Kilwinning, and the people in that area will always have a special place in my heart. Sadly, though, the west of Scotland is an area that has entrenched social deprivation and health inequalities. In the area where I live, the data that we are presented with is frightening. For example, a man living in the deprived area of Fullerton in Irvine has an average life expectancy of just 74 years, while another man living just 14 miles along the road in the more affluent area of Fairlie can expect to live eight years longer. That is one of many grim examples of social deprivation in Scotland that demonstrates that the people who are still most likely to suffer from NHS cuts are the very poorest in our society. No one can doubt the commitment of NHS staff to the health and wellbeing of the people of Ayrshire and Arran, but over the past four years I have found that those staff have continuously been hampered by a Scottish Government in Edinburgh that has not shown the same level of commitment to tackling health inequalities. After an enlightening presentation from Dr Harry Burns, the Scottish Government’s chief medical officer, North Ayrshire Council was reassured that we were justified in making a significant investment in early years intervention as well as taking greater steps to promote preventative healthcare. Those measures include providing 210 priority nursery places through our early years partnership programme, including 80 day-care places for the most vulnerable children in the area. We are ensuring that 100 per cent of looked-after children are given health assessments and we are delivering an increase in health-enhancing behaviours such as walking, cycling and swimming through our healthy futures project. Those first steps in tackling health inequalities are encouraging, but they are only the first steps. Gastric bands and heart bypasses are not the cure for obesity and heart disease; they are reactive treatments. We need preventative measures and early intervention. The health secretary might boast that her party is protecting the NHS from the worst of the cuts, but in North Ayrshire we are painfully aware of the squeeze on health spending. The NHS in Scotland has had to cope with a real-terms reduction in health spending, which is a poor settlement for health boards when set against the SNP’s promise to protect their budgets. It might be uncomfortable for SNP members to accept, but the NHS in Scotland is now experiencing its worst financial settlement since devolution. To compound the difficulties that we in Ayrshire are facing, the introduction of the NHS Scotland resource allocation committee—NRAC—formula, which is the new mechanism that decides the proportion of funding for health boards in Scotland, means that we are looking at a smaller share of funding. That lack of funding is partly because the formula no longer accounts for unemployment and deprivation, so it disproportionately discriminates against poorer areas such as the Ayrshire and Arran NHS Board and Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board areas. Despite having the largest island in Scotland—Arran—and the Cumbrae isles, NHS Ayrshire and Arran is not entitled to the same island adjustment as Highland, Western Isles, Orkney and Shetland health boards. It seems that, although Arran is an island, it is not enough of an island. I ask the cabinet secretary to instruct the NRAC technical committee to review the formula for allocating funding to ensure a more equal and fair share for the health boards in the west of Scotland. To take Scotland forward, we must eradicate the inequalities in our society. I call on the cabinet secretary to work with all members to achieve that aim. If we do, we will see a better and healthier Scotland.