My regional office is in Dumfries and Galloway, which is one of the reasons why CAP funding is of particular interest to me. The region of Dumfries and Galloway has roughly 40 per cent of Scotland’s dairy herd, 19 per cent of its beef cattle and 15 per cent of its sheep, but only 3 per cent of Scotland’s people. In 2011, according to research by the Crichton Institute, approximately 10 per cent of the working population of Dumfries and Galloway worked on farms and 8 per cent of Scottish holdings were located in the region. For those stark reasons, the new EU common agricultural policy is vital. There is absolutely no doubt that Dumfries and Galloway—which, despite the vital contribution that it makes to our agricultural sector, faces economic challenges—would benefit substantially from a yes vote this September. An area that accounts for a well-above-average share of Scotland’s dairy and beef herds and agricultural holdings would surely be at the front of the queue for an improved CAP. The EU table that breaks down pillar 1 and pillar 2 payments per hectare is nothing short of a scandal for Scotland and for our rural economy, which has such an influence on the lives and opportunities of my constituents. As other members have pointed out, the UK has failed to negotiate an acceptable agricultural budget allocation. That is an understatement. We are now bottom of the funding tables for pillar 1 and pillar 2. The UK Government has let Scotland down badly. Unlike 16 other member states, it did not negotiate extra resources for rural development. Those funds underpin a vital range of projects and services in my constituency, which include everything from encouraging diversification into tourism to providing training for young people. It is simply beyond comprehension that Ireland will receive twice as much pillar 1 funding and a staggering seven times as much pillar 2 funding as Scotland. The Czech Republic’s pillar 1-eligible area might be smaller than Scotland’s but it still gets one and a half times as much pillar 1 funding as Scotland. Moreover, although Denmark’s agricultural area is less than two thirds that of Scotland’s, its average per hectare pillar 2 rate is, at €31, more than two and half times as high as that for Scotland, which gets €11. If Scotland had been an independent country at the start of negotiations for the 2014 to 2019 EU agricultural budget, Scotland’s farmers and rural areas would, under the formula that was agreed and which applies to all member states, be €1 billion better off. Although a detailed breakdown is not available, it stands to reason that my Dumfries and Galloway constituents would be well placed to benefit from a substantial proportion of that €1 billion uplift and an above-average percentage of the 2,500 rural jobs that the Scottish Government has calculated the extra billion would create. What a missed opportunity—and I cannot emphasise enough that it is not only farmers who are missing out. The Dumfries and Galloway local development plan states: “Agriculture is integral to many tourism enterprises and has a major impact on food and drink both in terms of food processing and direct sales.” Just this month, The Scottish Farmer published a poll that showed that 47 per cent of respondents will vote yes this September. Given the UK Government’s failures in this regard, that is really no surprise. I will finish by quoting a South Scotland farmer who, far from regarding the constitutional debate as marginal to her business, considers it to be central. Carol Douglas from Roxburghshire has said: “Westminster Governments have argued for a significant reduction in farming payments, despite the fact we already get the worst farming deal as part of the UK.” That constituent has now joined the farming for yes campaign. Although the situation right now is poor, there is also the prospect of a complete cut in agricultural support if Scotland remains in the political union with England and England votes to leave the EU in an in/out referendum. Scottish agriculture and our rural industries will be in the hands of a Westminster Government with a stated policy of drastically reducing or even ending farm payments altogether. That would be a disaster.

I, too, congratulate Angus MacDonald on securing this debate on a subject close to my heart. However, before I begin, Presiding Officer, I must apologise to you, fellow members and the minister as I will have to leave the debate early. I am, of course, absolutely delighted with today’s announcement, not just because I led last year’s members’ business debate in which I asked the Government to consult on a national tree but because so many people—4,500, I understand—responded to the Government’s consultation. I know that the Government went out of its way to reach as many groups as possible, including children. That was a great thing, because the consultation itself helped to raise awareness. I thank the minister for copying me into the letter to David Stewart, the convener of the Public Petitions Committee, who raised the issue in response to Alex Hamilton’s petition. Like other members, I congratulate Mr Hamilton on the success of his campaign. I also congratulate the organisations that supported him, such as the Woodland Trust, the Borders Forest Trust, Trees for Life, RSPB Scotland, the Scottish Wildlife Trust and the John Muir Trust among probably lots of others. After the most recent ice age, pinewoods covered up to 1.7 million hectares of Scotland, but by 2000 only 18,000 hectares of that forest remained. The Scots pine is our only native conifer and has a special place in our hearts, our history, our landscape, our culture and the economy. Many poets, including Aonghas MacNeacail, Sheena Blackhall, William Hershaw and Robin Fulton Macpherson, have been inspired to verse by the Scots pine. Members who are interested can enjoy their work in the anthology of tree poems “Into the Forest”, which is edited by Mandy Haggith and was published last year. Jackie Kay, a poet whom I greatly admire, compared her Highland grandmother to a Scots pine, calling her “tall straight-backed proud and plentiful”. That beautiful description underlines why the Scots pine is such a wonderful addition to our range of national symbols such as tartan, the thistle and the lion rampant. The Scots pine lives for up to 600 years, its sap was prized in boat building and it played a vital part in our maritime history and ship-building tradition. It is also known as the tree of heroes and symbolises immortality. Putting that romance and history aside, today’s announcement is, as other members have said, great news for the environment because the Scots pine and pine forests generally provide homes for species such as the capercaillie, the Scottish crossbill, the pine marten and the red squirrel. The biodiversity that other members have talked about is encouraged by the planting of more trees such as the Scots pine. I commend the Government’s ambition to increase Scotland’s forest cover from 18 to 25 per cent by 2050 and believe that the announcement will help to achieve that ambition. Woodlands also play a role in enhancing our sense of wellbeing. The social and economic research group at Forest Research found that woodland enhances our physical as well as our mental health, and it encourages outdoor activities. For example, the Galloway forest park, in my region, is the largest such park in Britain and contains a variety of tourist attractions including the barn owl haven and the red kite trail. In addition, forestry employs a great many people and is an important part of our economy. In the South Scotland region alone it supports 2,000 jobs. For all those reasons, today’s announcement is fantastic. I end on a note of slight concern, however. The Scots pine is threatened by a number of tree diseases. The Woodland Trust has given us a briefing on that for today’s debate, which states that the Scotland rural development programme includes a new category of support for tree health that would support woodland owners who have lost 30 per cent of their woods to various diseases, allowing them to restock. However, the trust mentions that the tight CAP settlement for Scotland, which we have been discussing today, could threaten that and asks how that support is likely to be funded. Anything that the minister could share with the chamber in that regard would be very welcome.

Will the cabinet secretary explain in more detail the consultation process and what plans there are for local policing in the area going forward?

I, too, congratulate Stewart Maxwell on securing this important debate and on the excellence of his speech. Indeed, all the speeches that have gone before mine have been excellent. The stigmatisation of the Jews did not, of course, begin with the rise of Hitler. For many centuries, the Jews of Europe were marginalised, persecuted and called names. Ultimately, that is what led to their being slaughtered at a rate of 9,000 a day in the Nazi death factories. It is therefore our duty as European citizens to ensure that we fight anti-Semitism as a particular type of racism that is deeply embedded in our shared history. I am pleased to say that its influence has been waning for many years, but we must not become complacent and we must always be ready to root out this evil, which is Europe’s great historical shame. For that reason, I endorse the concerns that Ken Macintosh expressed about anti-Semitism raising its head in our national game of football. Our Jewish community in Scotland is small, but it will always remain an important part of our country’s rich tapestry. One of the most notable members of the community was a man whom I particularly admired: the late Professor David Daiches of Edinburgh, the son of a Lithuanian-born rabbi. His father believed that there was a strong mutual respect between Jews and Scottish Presbyterians, both of whom revered the Old Testament. He also noted that Scotland was one of the few countries in mediaeval Europe that never drafted a state law persecuting Jews. It is important that we continue to make no distinction between people on the grounds of their religion, culture, colour or ethnicity. It is significant that the Declaration of Arbroath, which tends to be remembered for other reasons, also has a little-remembered passage in which it notes that God makes no distinction between “Jew and Greek, Scotsman or Englishman”. There is never room for complacency and, in recent years, small far-right groups have made attempts to demonise other religions in the same way that Judaism has been demonised. We must all stand up against that, so I am pleased that every party that is represented in the chamber has done so. With that in mind, I will use the debate to commemorate some of those who stood up against the evil of the Holocaust. Some of them were household names, such as Oskar Schindler, but others are less well known, although their bravery is equally deserving of commemoration. Although Oskar Schindler survived the war, many righteous Gentiles paid the ultimate price. One such individual was Jane Haining, who was a Scot from Dumfriesshire in the South Scotland region that I represent. Born in 1897 in Lochenhead farm, Dunscore, she became a carer at a young age when her mother died in childbirth, leaving seven children. After excelling academically at Dumfries academy, Jane worked as a secretary in Glasgow and for the church. Her church work and love of children took her to Budapest in Hungary in 1932, when she became matron of a school and home for orphaned Jewish girls aged 6 to 16. There were 315 students in her charge, 48 of them boarders. When war broke out, the Church of Scotland advised its missionaries to leave Hungary, but Jane declined. She had heard stories of Nazi brutality towards Jewish people and wrote to a friend: “If these children need me in days of sunshine, how much more do they need me in days of darkness?” Jane worked on despite police surveillance and with little food and resources. She made trips to the market at 5 am to find food for her girls and patched up her students’ worn-out shoes with her own leather suitcases. In March 1944, German troops overthrew the pro-Nazi Government in Hungary and, in April that year, Jane was arrested by the Gestapo. She was accused of working among the Jews and showing sympathy for the children by crying when they were forced to wear the star of David. Jane was sent to Auschwitz and never returned. She was dead within three months—August 1944—and one of the most shocking things that reading about her death brought home to me is that, during the three months for which she was in Auschwitz, 1.3 million people died in the camp with her. Jane was one of millions, but every one of those millions who were murdered was a unique human being. Many more Jewish Scots have relatives who were murdered and many more are themselves descended from Holocaust refugees. Other members mentioned the Kindertransport initiative in which young Jewish children were evacuated from occupied Europe after Kristallnacht. One of my most moving experiences as a journalist was writing an anniversary piece about the Kindertransport about 20 years ago. I interviewed a lady in Lanarkshire who had come to Scotland as a very young child—perhaps five or six. By that time, she was an elderly lady with a Scottish husband and several children and grandchildren. She began to describe her memories of Kristallnacht and, as a five-year-old, of witnessing a group of Nazi soldiers surround an old Jewish man. They taunted him and she described how they took out a lighter and set his beard on fire. Telling the story all those years later, that elderly lady became completely traumatised and we had to end the interview. The scars had remained with her all her life. That is why we should not cover up the scar that the Holocaust left on Europe and the lives that it snuffed out with such brutality. I will finish with the words of the late Ernest Levy, one of Scotland’s leading Jewish citizens who, like Jane Haining, was taken from Budapest to Auschwitz. He explained why he wrote of his dreadful experiences: “We are trying to tell the world so this cannot happen again and we have learned a lot, although many have still not learned from the past”.

Dumfriesshire, in the South Scotland region that I represent, was home to the great Robert Burns, whose birthday we celebrate this Saturday and in whose honour I am wearing a red, red rose. Burns lived and died in Dumfries, where he worked as an exciseman, and his modest sandstone house is preserved as a museum. The farmhouse he built at Ellisland also still stands, and you can view the stove where his wife Jean baked bread, and the orchard that gave him his first commercial crop of apples. You can drink reaming swats in the Globe inn, his favourite howff, and sit fast by an ingle in his favourite chair, then move upstairs to inspect the verse he scratched on the window panes. You can visit the lovely St Michael’s kirk, where Burns is buried and where his mausoleum has been carefully restored. The town is alive with his spirit. The Big Burns Supper festival, which opens on Friday, takes full advantage of that unique backdrop. On Saturday, the town centre will host a free homecoming carnival: a community parade involving 2,000 people. They will paint the town tartan to the sound of the Manchester School of Samba, because the Big Burns Supper is nothing if not eclectic on an epic scale. The festival, which will last until late Sunday night, brings Burns back into the heart of the community he loved and, indeed, into the hearts of the people who live there. It is at once populist and intellectual, international and hyperlocal. The Big Burns Supper does not treat Burns as a relic to be preserved—something that another Dumfriesshire poet, Hugh MacDiarmid, often criticised—and it is not frightened to have fun with Burns, or even to move on to different artistic ground altogether. Burns was an innovator and an internationalist, as well as a proud Scot, and the Big Burns Supper festival reflects all those facets of his personality. We all know that he loved a good night out, which is absolutely guaranteed this weekend. In fact, if you go to bigburnssupper.com before midnight tomorrow, you can take advantage of a two-for-one ticket deal. I can only give a taste of the programme. The bard would have enjoyed the burlesque Burns supper, which will feature haggis, neeps and—I presume—bonnie lassies in corsets, and maybe a few bonnie laddies in corsets, too, and will take place in the atmospheric spiegeltent. By contrast, Dick Gaughan, Big Country, the Hackney Colliery Band, local rock legend Cammy Black, and Concha Buika, the Miami based Cuban-flamenco singer, offer a taste of the broad range of musicians. There is cutting-edge contemporary drama such as “Blood Orange” and “If These Spasms Could Speak”, which are counterpointed by a midnight roller disco with the Doonhame Derby Dolls. On the streets there will be magic wherever you turn. “Occupy Dumfries” comprises 12 unique pieces of pop-up art, including “Big Burn” by the Stove artists collective, “Soap Opera” by Dumfries and Galloway youth theatre and the tantalising “Naughty @ Night” by Justin Hyslop. “Give your Tongue a Birl” will allow members of the public to speak of their passion for Burns and Scotland. There will be a Burns tea dance with soup and Dundee cake, and award-winning poets Hugh McMillan and Stuart Paterson will explore the poet’s favourite pastime with “Freedom an’ Whisky Ganthegither!” in the Coach and Horses pub on Whitesands. Five thousand Burns suppers will be eaten over the weekend. They include the ten-minute version served up in the Globe by manager Jane Brown, who is currently president of the World Burns Federation. Furry festival mascot Harry the Haggis will host special suppers for kids, with haggis sausage and chips, so even picky seven-year-olds can participate. The festival director and founder, Graham Main, grew up in the council scheme of Lochside on the west bank of the Nith and studied at the then Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama. He became a successful actor, playwright, director and festival organiser in Ireland, London and Spain. Then he came home, and what an impact that homecoming has made. However, the Big Burns Supper is also a collective community achievement. The strength of the festival team is testament to the talent in Dumfries, and the number of local volunteers reflects its strong sense of neighbourliness. I am delighted to have two members of that team, Andrew and Margaret Wood, in the gallery this evening. I cannot list everyone who makes the festival a success, but I should mention the sponsors: 8020, EventScotland, Creative Scotland, Dumfries and Galloway Council, the Holywood Trust and homecoming Scotland. So many local businesses offer support that I cannot list them all. I also thank the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs for the encouragement that she has given to the festival. Her presence at the Big Burns Supper in 2011 and 2012 was a huge boost to morale, and was particularly appreciated given her divided loyalties as an Ayrshire lass. She will know that Dumfries is a nominee for one of this year’s creative place awards, which will be announced on 29 January. The work of the Big Burns Supper team has played a vital role in achieving that nomination. The creativity does not stop in January. The Big Burns Supper team contributes to creativity in Dumfries throughout the year, with the work of Electric Theatre’s workshop, Dumfries and Galloway youth theatre, the Dumfries community choir, the Stove, the spring fling, the Dumfries and Galloway arts festival and much more. I said that Dumfries brims with living history, but the Big Burns Supper is about the future of our culture as well as the past, which is why it gives me great pleasure to pay tribute to it tonight.

I thank the clerks, the Scottish Parliament information centre staff, my committee colleagues, who helped to scrutinise the bill, and everyone who gave evidence on it. The Burrell collection is an outstanding vision of international significance, and after careful consideration of the wide range of oral and written evidence, the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill Committee is firm in its belief that the time has come to allow it to be seen by a wider audience. Indeed, I believe that we have a duty to the people of Glasgow and the people of Scotland to promote the collection, which is a hidden treasure. The Burrell collection opened in 1993 and at first had 1 million visitors a year. Sadly, that figure has diminished dramatically; it is now down to fewer than a quarter of a million visitors. As Dr Bridget McConnell pointed out in her evidence to the committee, the collection is still relatively unknown both here and internationally. Amending the 1944 bequest to allow a significant and, probably, once-in-a-lifetime world tour will help to raise awareness of it both at home and abroad. It is hoped that such a tour will also help to facilitate future preservation of the collection by engagement with the international community’s art institutions on research, conservation and mutually beneficial loans. I was impressed with the evidence that Sir Angus Grossart, who is one of Scotland’s foremost art collectors, gave to the committee. He has been very involved in advising Glasgow Life on its plans. Speaking of the proposed tour, he told us: “This is a chance to engage with a wider range of institutions, including those to which we are not sending the loan exhibition.”—[Official Report, Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill Committee; 9 September 2013; c 42.] He spoke of the opportunities for scholarship and profile raising that can result from loan offers. In fact, wider engagement by the public, scholarship, conservation, fundraising, awareness raising, profile raising and tourism were all frequently cited as potential benefits that can accrue from lending. There is also the practical and very immediate problem that the building that houses the collection is in urgent need of refurbishment and does not, in its current condition, provide a safe environment. The committee witnessed at first hand the regrettable condition of the building, which is strewn with tarpaulins in order to prevent further water ingress. Several exhibits have been removed from display to prevent water damage, and it is estimated that only about 2,000 of the 9,000 items in the collection can be displayed at any one time. The prospect of the extra capacity that would be provided through refurbishment and the opportunity that that would bring to display items that are currently inaccessible to the public are very welcome. As with any capital project, financial costs figured significantly in the discussions surrounding the refurbishment. The promoters have argued that a tour of the Burrell collection could raise approximately £15 million of the estimated £45 million cost of the refurbishment. Although the committee is not fully convinced that it is possible to estimate revenue with any degree of certainty at this stage, we accept that a contribution is likely to be raised by promoting the collection globally. We are not convinced that that contribution will amount to £15 million, but I emphasise the strong feeling that the issue at hand is about raising not money but the profile of the collection. The bill is not about judging Glasgow City Council on how much money it will spend on refurbishment; it is about the principle of lending and promoting the collection. It is indisputable that William Burrell was very much in favour of the principle of lending. We know that he wanted to share the collection through loans, and it was often pointed out during evidence sessions that Burrell himself was a considerable lender. The focus of the committee’s decision has, therefore, not been on whether Sir William would have been in favour of lending his collection—we know that he was—but on whether it is safe nowadays to lend outside Britain. In the bequest in 1944, Sir William stipulated that he would not allow any of his works to be loaned overseas. As a shipping magnate, he was all too aware of how the works that he had collected might be damaged in transit at that time. However, Sir Peter Hutchison, the chair of the Burrell trustees, has put forward the argument that, on the whole, transportation is now much safer than it used to be and that although risk cannot be eliminated, it can be mitigated. We found that to be a convincing argument. As a result, the committee was persuaded that it is sometimes appropriate to depart from the wishes of benefactors, particularly if the circumstances that led them to adopt a certain position have changed. We have heard convincing arguments that Burrell wished to promote access to his collection as long as it was not placed in danger. The committed noted, however, valid concerns relating to transportation of particularly fragile works such as pastels and textiles. Indeed, we were so concerned about the matter that we elected to take further evidence on it. Having taken further expert evidence, we concluded that decisions regarding the lending of certain items should be taken case by case. Crucially, the bill provides for the preparation of a lending code to be agreed by Glasgow City Council and the Burrell trustees, which will set out the basis on which new powers for lending and borrowing can be exercised. That will offer another layer of protection for fragile items. The code should safeguard against excessive and overcommercial lending and against very fragile items being put at unreasonable risk. After an initial tour, lending decisions would be based primarily on scholarship and the opportunity for conservation. Moreover, the committee recognises that Glasgow Museums is an experienced lender and we were told in evidence that it has an impressive record with regard to lending and borrowing a great number of items without having made a single insurance claim. In recommending that the bill be passed, the committee and Parliament are placing their trust in the promoter to take great care of the collection and to ensure that the refurbishment that has been used as an argument in favour of the bill does, indeed, take place. Sir William Burrell was a pragmatic man. We have established that he was not against the principle of touring or lending, and was very much in favour of the promotion of his collection. Although Britain might in many senses have been at the centre of the world while Sir William lived, that is no longer the reality, and the kind of museums that the promoter is talking about touring the collection to are world class. By all accounts, the state of the building that currently houses the collection is now critical, and given that the estimated length of the refurbishment period is four years, the fact is that the collection must be moved somewhere. Under the terms of Burrell’s bequest, works can be moved around Great Britain, so it can be presumed that he accepted the risks that are inherent in transportation of items. If we take that into account, along with the scientific and technological advances that have been made, which we heard about in evidence, it seems reasonable to suggest that, on balance, Sir William Burrell would not be opposed to the principle of the bill. I move, That the Parliament agrees that the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill be passed.

I totally agree with the minister’s point about Scotland leading the way in strategies and so on. However, in a 10-year period, we have also seen an increase in prescriptions of antidepressants, particularly the new generation of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Some people have been critical of that, but perhaps there is a link between the fall in the number of suicides and the fact that people have access to those antidepressants. Those who criticise the prescribing of them might do well to think about that.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that free higher education is helping to give Scottish students the best start to their careers by keeping student debt levels lower in Scotland than in the rest of the UK?

Will the member give way?

I am puzzled by the comparison between free school meals and breakfasts. The last time that I spoke to John Dickie from the Child Poverty Action Group, he told me that they had done an analysis that showed that the most vulnerable children were far more likely to benefit from free lunches than from breakfasts.

Later today, my colleague John Wilson will lead a members’ business debate on the 12 days of debtmas, as the minister said. Rather than overlapping, the two debates complement each other. The 12 days of debtmas is a Scottish Government campaign that warns people against payday loans and encourages them to join a credit union instead. As Kezia Dugdale said, credit unions have given important written and oral evidence that informs the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee’s report on the bill. I will look more closely at what they said about the bill, given their widely recognised role as responsible lenders whose only interest is the financial wellbeing of their members, as opposed to that of shareholders, investors and highly paid banking executives. Credit unions are also in a position to lend to groups who might otherwise have difficulty in accessing finance. I was pleased that ABCUL welcomed many key measures in the bill. In its submission to the committee, it singled out a number of measures for praise, including the requirement for anyone who seeks debt management or statutory debt relief to receive advice from an approved money adviser, although it emphasised that that person should be independent, which makes a lot of sense. ABCUL welcomed the measures on financial education, and the adoption of a single standard financial tool to calculate contributions in debt repayment programmes, protected trust deeds and bankruptcies. Crucially, it welcomed the proposal to extend the repayment period for protected trust deeds from three to four years, as well as the proposed power for the Accountant in Bankruptcy to refuse to discharge a debtor who has not complied with the terms of their bankruptcy and who has not co-operated with their trustee. As the minister said, debt—particularly unmanaged debt that leads to bankruptcy—is one of the major problems that face the people of Scotland in the 21st century. We must take steps to address it, and the bill will do that. Many people run up debts for all sorts of reasons, not least the financial crisis, unemployment and illness. It is in no one’s interests to keep those people in an extended state of penury—that would be inhumane and bad for the country’s economic confidence, particularly in relation to encouraging entrepreneurship—but the bill will not do that. It makes an effort to balance the needs of debtors and creditors. I welcome the minister’s announcement, in response to the committee’s concerns about debtors, that he intends to raise the cap on entry into the MAP from £10,000 to £17,000 of debt. That will directly benefit the most needy. However, as my colleague Mike MacKenzie said, we must recognise that debtors are not the only victims of debt. Small creditors are often crippled when their bills are not paid. As a substitute member of the committee, I raised the case of an arm’s-length organisation in my constituency—dgArts—that collapsed two years ago while owing money to a lot of small businessmen and artists. When the committee took evidence, those creditors had still not been paid. One creditor—one of my constituents—contacted me to say that he was owed £1,200 and that he was being offered 12p in the £1, which is below average and would leave him with considerably less money than the insolvency practitioner charged per hour to administer the scheme over two years. As ABCUL made clear in evidence, there are too many cases in which the main beneficiary of insolvency is the insolvency practitioner.

I agree with that. Frank McKillop of ABCUL made it clear in oral evidence that he feels that creditors are at the back of the queue when there is an insolvency. He pointed to cases in which a debtor entered a trust deed and made no discernible adjustment to his or her lifestyle—to the extent of continuing to enjoy luxury holidays. There has long been a concern about the transparency of protected trust deeds and the fact that the high costs of fees and outlays can sometimes swallow up any return to creditors. The bill is designed to address that through the standard financial tool. As the minister pointed out to the committee, a third of protected trust deeds pay no dividend whatsoever. In some trust deeds, more than half the moneys that are gathered go on administration costs, which can often rise by as much as a quarter over the lifetime of a case. It is often said that insolvency practitioners have been the biggest beneficiaries of the crisis that began in 2008. An extreme example of that might be the £40 million in fees accumulated by the administrators of Woolworths after its collapse. We are not dealing with that scale of insolvency here but, on a much smaller scale, abuses do occur. That is why I very much welcome the support that has been given to the bill by the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee. It is a progressive bill that I am happy to support.

The member is probably too young to remember the anti-poll tax campaign, but I was a proud member of the no-pay campaign, and my wages were arrested by a Labour council. I know that the member was too young to be involved at that time, but would she like to comment on that rather shameful aspect of her party’s history?

I add my congratulations to Stewart Stevenson for securing a debate on this important subject. Libraries are vital for many communities throughout Scotland, enhancing social cohesion, supporting and empowering community groups and encouraging lifelong learning. I represent South Scotland, which is a predominantly rural area, like Moray, where the ability to travel long distances, often without the assistance of reliable public transport, determines an individual’s quality of life. In communities such as those that I represent, mobile libraries are of great value to people who are, themselves, less mobile. The people who have been found to be most reliant on those services in various client surveys that have been conducted across the country, such as over-65s and mothers with young children, are already being disproportionately hit by Westminster’s austerity agenda and cuts to public services. A recent library customer survey that was carried out in East Lothian in my region found that 67 per cent of library users were female and that 30 per cent of the total number of customers were over the age of 65. In the light of that, I was alarmed to hear that East Lothian Council, as Moray Council did, is giving consideration to proposals to cut library services—particularly mobile library services—in the area.

Right. Two vehicles serve communities and individuals in the county whose access to libraries might otherwise be limited. The places that are served by those mobile libraries include sheltered housing, old people’s homes, suburbs of some towns, farm cottages, villages, rural schools and play groups. Both mobile libraries have a fortnightly route calendar. There has been no public consultation on the proposals and, as members can imagine, they are causing some alarm in the rural villages of the county. The discontinuation of one vehicle might deliver a saving of £5,000 a year for the council, but mobile libraries have been found to provide a service to the affected communities at a fraction of the cost of static services. Although I accept that in these tough economic times local authorities must choose carefully how to spend limited funds, I urge authorities such as East Lothian Council and Moray Council to use what resources they have wisely and to protect the most valued services at the heart of our communities. At a national level, the Scottish Government has strived to do that. In the face of a budget cut of £3.1 billion—or 9.9 per cent—over the current five-year spending review period, it has successfully prioritised and protected our national health service and abolished tuition fees while fully funding a council tax freeze that, by 2017, will have saved the average band D household £1,682. In comparison with the way in which the Scottish Government has been treated by the United Kingdom Government, local government has been treated fairly under the current Scottish Administration. As the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth announced last week, in 2014-15 and 2015-16 the local government finance settlements will be maintained at around £10.6 billion.

The protection of local authority funding has meant that in Scotland we have not yet seen the mass of library closures the likes of which have been ubiquitous throughout the rest of the UK. A preliminary scoping study that was conducted in March to gauge the extent and impact of local authority efficiency savings showed considerable variety across Scotland, but the position compares favourably with that in other parts of the UK, where closures have been more common. That is to be welcomed, but we must do more to prevent library closures.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what the health and wellbeing impact is of income inequality. (S4O-02692)

The United Kingdom is the fourth most unequal country in the developed world. How could a fairer and more equal independent Scotland address the poor health outcomes that are caused by income inequality?

To address the point that Mr Findlay has just made, I note that, as a member of the committee from the outset of the current parliamentary session, I have made it clear that I have always wanted to hear young people’s voices in both our inquiries into young people in care. The teenagers whom we spoke to in a round-table session that was organised by Who Cares? Scotland gave harrowing accounts of their lives and, as my colleague Clare Adamson said, they were given a good amount of time to do that. That meeting was not held in public because it was felt—quite rightly, in my view—that we have a duty of care to the young people, so we should not expose them to media scrutiny because many are already traumatised by a lifetime of abuse and neglect. The young people who came to see us first staged a short play about the experience of being in care—or, as we now call it, being looked after. It was a physical piece of drama with little dialogue, but it spoke volumes. The young protagonist was pushed between the adults who were supposed to care for him and was constantly rejected. The more he was rejected, the worse his behaviour became—he was uncommunicative, angry and silently aggressive. Therefore, when an adult offered help, the boy rejected them; he mirrored the rejection that he had had to deal with all his life. As a result of his challenging behaviour, which was caused by emotional damage, he was, of course, rejected by adults even more. Afterwards, what alarmed me about those teenagers’ experiences of care was the fact that they had been identified as being in need of protection very early in their lives—many of them had been taken into care before the age of five. Despite that, none had achieved permanent placement; most had had multiple placements and had experienced foster family rejection and breakdown. Their life experience certainly vindicated the central purpose of our inquiry. Many of the young people said that they would have gained more stability and permanence in a small residential unit in their teenage years—I was certainly impressed by the residential unit in Glasgow that we visited—albeit that they would have liked such residential care to have allowed them to have as normal a family life as possible, for example by having friends round for sleepovers and all the other things that are part of growing up for most young people in our society. It is also important to emphasise, as other members have done, that the majority view of the young people whom we spoke to was that they were better off in care than they would have been with their birth parents. One boy who was doing well in his education and who was an extremely engaging and articulate young man said that he believed that being taken into care had saved him from disaster and turned his life around. However, the young people want the experience of care to be improved. They want more permanence and, above all, they want to be listened to. They also want their privacy to be respected and their views to be considered. Sometimes, that simply means that those in authority should adhere to their own recognised good practice. Other members have mentioned the meeting at which young people talked about the children’s hearings system. They said that if they wanted to make their views known to the children’s panel privately, they had to ask others, including their birth parents, to leave the room. Many of them had felt too inhibited and intimidated to make that request in public. Those children loved their parents, even when they had not, for whatever reason, been capable of providing them with the nurturing home and stability that they needed. Those young people did not want to articulate their own needs because they were afraid of hurting the feelings of their birth parents and—on some occasions—the feelings of other family members and professionals who were involved in their lives. All a children’s panel would have to do is ask the child in advance whether he or she would like a private session. For anyone who is interested, that issue is dealt with on page 13 of the committee’s report. I was interested in the evidence that we took from the children’s reporter, in which the problem was acknowledged. As I understand it, the Children’s Hearings (Scotland) Act 2011 will improve the situation. However, as the report says, the committee is concerned about the issue, so we will return to it to find out how the 2011 act is working in practice and whether it has resulted in improvement in some of the areas that the young people complained about. As the convener has already detailed, the committee’s long-running inquiry dovetailed with the introduction in Parliament of the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, and many of the concerns that were identified in the inquiry will be addressed by measures in that bill. Indeed, the Government has already put in place measures, such as the establishment of CELCIS at the University of Strathclyde. Other members have expressed their gratitude to the large number of witnesses who gave their time to speak to the committee during our inquiry. I reiterate those thanks and take the opportunity to say how impressed I was by the oral evidence from CELCIS. It gave me a sense of encouragement that we are taking the problem very seriously indeed at the highest level. From now on, we will have a body of research and expertise to draw on to tackle the issues that the most vulnerable children in Scotland face. I very much hope that the work of CELCIS will inform good practice on the ground. I know that it is working closely with local authorities, just as it has helped to shape Government policy for the good. I welcome the Government’s response to our report and the minister’s letter to the committee, which reiterates the commitment to early intervention in tandem with early permanence. I note, too, that the young people whom we spoke to had been affected by mistakes in the system that are already being addressed, and that there is already evidence of change. For example, the trend for children to become looked after—and the trend for them to become looked after at an earlier age—shows that social workers are now acting more quickly to assess families and to intervene. There is some way to go, but there is no doubt from the minister’s speech and the work that she has done on the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill that she is extremely committed to addressing the problem, and in no way underestimates the job that needs to be done. By putting the key elements of GIRFEC in statute and introducing measures such as the named person, the bill will legally require local authorities to improve permanence planning and collaborative working, which our report shows to be essential in tackling the issue. Although much work needs to be done, I feel optimistic that we are going in the right direction and that we will do the young people justice.

After independence, how will Scotland be placed relative to other countries in terms of its wealth, and how will it compare to the rest of the UK?

The cabinet secretary told the Educational Institute of Scotland in June that it would be “utterly unacceptable” for any school, headteacher or local authority to require unnecessary paperwork from teachers. Can he reiterate that view?

I am pleased to open the preliminary stage of the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill and to provide the Parliament with some background on the bill. Before I do that, I thank the clerks and the Scottish Parliament information centre for the considerable work that they put into informing the committee about the background to the bill. Indeed, I thank all those who gave written and oral evidence, sometimes after travelling quite a distance. I also thank the staff of Pollok House for accommodating the committee at its first public sitting and the staff at the Burrell, who gave us a very interesting tour of the collection—both seen and unseen. Private bills propose laws that allow individuals, groups of individuals or corporate entities to acquire powers or benefits in excess of or in conflict with the general law. The bill is the third private bill to be introduced in this parliamentary session and it is the first that I have worked on. It has given me an interesting insight into that side of the Parliament’s work. Sir William Burrell was born in 1861 and worked from the age of 15 in the family’s shipping agency, in which he achieved great financial success. He developed a passion for art from a young age and as his wealth grew, so did his collection. Before his death in 1958, Burrell gifted an astoundingly broad collection of some 9,000 items, including stained glass, paintings, sculpture, furniture and even large pieces of architecture. Edinburgh and London were also considered as recipients for the collection, but only Glasgow would agree to the stipulations of the gift. To this day, the bequest represents the largest single gift of art treasures by one person to a single city. Very many of us in Scotland are familiar with the Burrell collection. Visitor numbers reached 1 million in the years that followed its opening in 1983 and I confess that it seems like yesterday when I went to see the collection in the days after the Queen opened it. Perhaps less well known is the buried treasure that is not currently on public display. The committee had the privilege of a behind-the-scenes tour of the collection, as I said, and we were amazed at the important paintings, furniture and architectural pieces that currently have no place on public display, as there is room to display only about 2,000 of the roughly 9,000 items in the collection. Sadly, our tour also revealed the poor state of the building that houses the collection, which is of course a relatively new and modern building. It is now almost 30 years since its completion and, by some accounts, the roof has never been quite right and there is now no hiding the fact that the situation has reached a critical point. The conservators, whose work is to carefully preserve the priceless artefacts, put quite a bit of their energy into designing tarpaulins to catch the drips from the waterlogged ceiling. It was very distressing to see what a sad state the building has got into. Although it was not in the committee’s remit to look at the building’s history, it would be fair to say that all the members of the committee were concerned that there was a poor relationship with the architect and that problems that seem to have been there from the beginning have not been resolved. Glasgow City Council now plans to renovate the building, not only to address the roof problems once and for all but to create more display space to bring some of that buried treasure into public display and allow more people in Glasgow, Scotland and beyond to enjoy Burrell’s collection. The bill’s purpose is to alter the restrictions that Burrell placed on lending and borrowing when he gave his collection to the people of Glasgow. In short, Burrell was happy for loans to be made in Great Britain but not oversees. He also prohibited the display of items that do not belong to the collection alongside items that do. Glasgow City Council wishes to allow loans to be made outwith Great Britain and for the restriction on borrowing to be relaxed, to allow related works to be displayed alongside those in the collection. All that would be governed by a lending code: a publicly accessible document that would set out the decision-making process that would govern any potential loans and would guarantee the involvement of the Burrell trustees in any final decision. The committee looked at the opportunities and risks of lending beyond Great Britain and tried to put ourselves in Burrell’s shoes and interpret what led him to place restrictions on his bequest. At this point it is important to state that there were no official objections to the bill’s proposals. There are many opportunities to be gained from lending the collection further afield. Displaying associated works side by side contributes to knowledge and we were reassured that lending in the future would be confined to a small number of items and would be for scholarly purposes only. We believe that the one-off tour planned by the bill’s promoter in association with the British Museum will help to raise the profile of not only the collection but Glasgow itself, encouraging more people to come to see the collection and—I hope—raising some money for the building’s renovation. It is time to put the collection on the world stage and stop hiding it away. We accept that lending is not without risk but most of our witnesses agreed that damage most often occurs not in transit but when works are being packed and unpacked and, as a result, the risk remains the same whether a work is being lent within Great Britain or overseas. We had very particular concerns about moving and redisplaying the collection’s more delicate items, particularly pastels and textiles, but were reassured by the specialist evidence that we sought on the matter.

It is impossible to know what was in Burrell’s mind when he placed those restrictions on his bequest. We know that he wanted to share his collection; after all, he lent regularly within Great Britain and, indeed, made a contribution to the great exhibition at Kelvingrove. We endorse the view of the promoter and others who contributed to the bill’s scrutiny that a private bill is necessary and appropriate and that there was no alternative means of achieving the same result. I again thank everyone who gave evidence. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Burrell Collection (Lending and Borrowing) (Scotland) Bill and agrees that it should proceed as a private bill.

I welcome the bill as a significant advance for the position of children and young people in Scotland. As my fellow Education and Culture Committee members have said, the committee has, in two other inquiries, examined outcomes for looked-after children. We agreed in both those inquiries that we need to tackle the problems of underachievement, neglect and poor parenting before families reach crisis point. We need a fundamental shift in philosophy and approach towards a focus on prevention. I believe that the bill will help to do that, and it is the reason why so many child welfare organisations also support its broad principles. In Scotland last year, there were more than 16,000 looked-after children. Although recent years have seen the number of new referrals fall, Scotland still has a higher proportion of looked-after children than other parts of the UK. The Government estimates that between 10,000 and 20,000 children live with drug-abusing parents, and that between 36,000 and 51,000 children in Scotland live with parents who have alcohol problems, so there is a crisis that we need to tackle. I mentioned the bill’s important emphasis on early intervention to prevent serious problems before they occur. An important means of delivering that step change is construction of a system in which it is easy for professionals to share information that could prevent a vulnerable child from coming to harm. As the minister has said, we are all familiar with the tragic cases that are covered in the news of children who die at the hands of their parents and carers. The common theme of the subsequent inquiries tends to be the same; someone had a vital piece of information that could have saved the child in question, but that information was not shared. That is why I want to concentrate today on how the bill seeks to improve information sharing between relevant public authorities where there are concerns about the wellbeing of individual children and young people. Key to that is the introduction of the named person, which was supported by 72 per cent of respondents to the bill consultation. It is supported by the Royal College of Nursing, by Tam Baillie—Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People—and by the wonderful John Carnochan, who is the inspiring co-founder of Strathclyde’s violence reduction unit. There has been considerable misunderstanding about the role of the named person, which already exists and works well in the Highlands, and we have heard colleagues talking about the evidence from that region. The role of named person must be universal, because if it is not some children will slip through the net, which is exactly what we are trying to prevent. To some extent, we already have universal provision. For example, everyone who has a baby has a health visitor allocated to them. When I had my children, which is quite some time ago now, the health visitor made one visit, saw that I had lots of support and was then able to go away and concentrate on people who needed support. In that sense, the measure is an extension of what we are already doing. The evidence from Bill Alexander of Highland Council showed how important the named person is as a means of ensuring that GIRFEC does what it is supposed to do. GIRFEC is rooted in co-operation between services, with the child being at the centre, and it ensures that children and families receive holistic services that are underpinned by collaboration. The committee’s convener has outlined some of the operational concerns about how the named person would work in particular circumstances, and I would like to endorse his comments about the definition of “wellbeing” and the lowering of the threshold for information sharing. In Scotland, under GIRFEC, the wellbeing indicators are known by the acronym SHANARRI—members of the Education and Culture Committee are very used to acronyms—which stands for safe, healthy, achieving, nurtured, active, respected, responsible and included. Those are all extremely positive things, which I think we would all want for our children, but how will different professionals apply SHANARRI when it comes to lowering the threshold for information sharing? I am sure that although most professionals will act responsibly, it is not unreasonable to raise concerns about overzealous individuals applying subjective views. I will give an example of what I mean. My children did not travel to primary school by themselves. Some people might think that I was an overprotective mother. That was my way of keeping them safe but, equally, it could be argued that I was breaching other SHANARRI indicators, because my children were not as active as they could have been, they did not get as much fresh air as they could have done and they were not included. People have different forms of parenting, so I would welcome reassurance that the use of the wellbeing indicators—which I know are already established—to lower the threshold for information sharing will be monitored by the Government, so that we can ensure that there are not cases in which it is abused and that interference does not go too far. That said, I support the bill and I support the principle of information sharing as a way of protecting the most vulnerable children.

I will vote for the bill, because I think that it is underpinned by tolerance, recognition and respect. It is about the fundamental human right to love and to express that love publicly, in a declaration of commitment that cannot be dismissed as second class or second best. The bill is a mark of how far we have come on the issue of equality in a relatively short period of time. It is only a few decades ago, in my own lifetime, that homosexuality was criminalised, and people lived double lives and lived in fear of exposure, blackmail and sometimes even imprisonment. We should never forget that such hazards remain very real in other countries where human rights are denied on the basis of sexuality and often gender. The language that is used by a small number of people outside the chamber in the wider debate on equal marriage has on occasion become polarised. We have heard the preposterous allegation that gay unions are tainted, and similarly we have seen those who have asked for reassurances in respect of their religious beliefs dismissed as homophobic. That language is not helpful, and I do not think that it reflects where the majority of the population stand on the issue. I support equal marriage in principle, but one of my reasons for speaking in the debate is personal. Like many people of my generation, I did not, when I was growing up in a very religious Roman Catholic family in a small Scottish town, know anyone who was gay. My first encounter with homosexuality was in 1975, when Thames Television broadcast “The Naked Civil Servant” in which John Hurt portrays Quentin Crisp. Although it was a breakthrough in the sense that it was a sympathetic film, it gave a stereotyped and almost caricaturish portrayal of homosexuality as outrageous and eccentric: something that was outside the mainstream. However, within a few years of that film, everything had changed. Suddenly we all knew someone in our own family or wider circle of friends who was openly gay. In my case, my cousin and close childhood friend Cal came out at the age of 18, and through him I formed many firm friendships with gay men in particular that have lasted a lifetime. It is perhaps not surprising, given my age and liberal outlook, that I was happy to accept my friend’s sexuality. What is more significant is that the older people in our family, who had very strong religious beliefs and grew up in a far more socially conservative age in the 1950s and 1960s, also accepted his sexuality. I am not saying that it happened overnight or that there was no awkwardness—or that there were not aunties whispering in private, “I just wish he’d meet a nice girl”—but there was public acceptance. There were joint invitations and Christmas cards, and family gatherings, and over time—as in many, many families—having a gay couple was utterly unremarkable. It was mainstream. When my cousin Cal died of cancer at the age of 50 three years ago, we grieved as a family, and his male partner was treated with the same consideration and sympathy as any heterosexual partner who had suffered such a loss would have been. The family saw the devoted nursing care that he gave to Cal in his last weeks, and at the funeral he was the chief mourner. That is not to say that the older members of the family, in their 70s, 80s and 90s, had abandoned in any way their strong religious beliefs, but, just as they said a silent prayer at the humanist funeral, they had reached an accommodation with the partnership that was based on love, and loyalty and basic human decency. That is why I believe that those harsh voices speaking out against the legislation are not typical of lay members of the Christian church-going population. The vast majority of religiously observant people—even those in churches that are officially against equal marriage—will accept this change in practice, just as they have accepted their gay friends and family members. They judge people on the basis of their character, not their sexuality. They ask, “Are they kind, loyal, generous and fair?” and “Are they a good son or daughter?” That is what matters to most of us. I welcome the fact that the Equality Act 2010 will be amended to further protect individual celebrants who do not wish to carry out same-sex marriage but who belong to a religious body that has opted to do so. That is about tolerance. Just as I do not believe that those with religious views opposing equal marriage should dictate the law, I do not believe that the law should impose my values on religious denominations. I conclude by reflecting on Margaret McCulloch’s comment when she spoke for the committee earlier that the committee would “agree to differ”. As we move forward, I think that society as a whole will agree to differ, and in doing so they are agreeing to respect difference: difference in sexuality. That is a mark of our tolerance. This piece of legislation is about the journey that we have made as a society. Although we have heard a lot today about marginalisation and alienation, and people feeling bullied and excluded, my personal experience is that the bill will bring the law into line with real life and real families. We are actually a much more tolerant society than this debate has sometimes given the impression we are.

I add my congratulations to those of others to Mike MacKenzie on securing this debate and to the 12 winners of the 2013 Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland awards, who make up the shortlist for the RIAS Andrew Doolan best building in Scotland award. I add my apologies to those of other members for not being able to attend the event this evening, because I, too, have another engagement. I congratulate the RIAS on the excellent work that it does in recognising and promoting exceptional Scottish architecture and I take this opportunity to pay tribute to the former RIAS secretary, Professor Charles McKean, who members will be aware died last month. Professor McKean was the professor of Scottish architectural history at the University of Dundee and he did much more than any other person to promote awareness of, and pleasure in, Scottish vernacular architecture. Just a brief look at some of his many publications over his career tells us a lot about the breadth and richness of our architecture. He wrote about the Scottish tollbooth, castles, Dundee as a renaissance port, Tain and Whithorn as pilgrimage towns, and Jacobean villas. We get the sense that, for a country of its size, Scotland has an enormous breadth of different architectural styles. We owe Professor McKean a great deal. Good design is not defined only by how a building looks; it is measured by its physical, social, environmental and functional value, which is what these awards pay tribute to. I am a South of Scotland MSP and I notice, rather unfortunately, that there are no South of Scotland buildings on the list. However, like Annabel Goldie, I have visited the Beacon Arts Centre in Greenock—that is where I am from. Just to add to what Ms Goldie said, the Beacon Arts Centre replaced the Arts Guild Theatre in Greenock. That was a much-loved traditional building and generations of people went to it to attend pantomimes, for example. For many people, that was the only place where they might have seen an arts event, gone to the theatre or participated in a school concert. I know that I did. It is a hard act to follow when a building such as that is so loved by the community, but the Beacon Arts Centre is an example of a modern piece of architecture that has already been embraced by the community that it serves, and it is probably attracting a lot more people to becoming involved in the arts. When I was there for the launch of the late George Wyllie’s paper boat in celebration of his work, a lot of schoolchildren and local people were there, and it was very participative. I also pay tribute to the way in which the building reflects the sea-going nature of the people of Inverclyde. The building really connects with the river, which is so important to the people of Inverclyde. There is an increasing awareness of the value of architecture and place in Scotland, and the role that it plays in national and local life. I am also pleased to be able to pay tribute to the Scottish Government’s creating places policy statement that was published this year. It notes the quality of our built environment and how it makes a radical improvement in the quality of our lives. The policy aims to place the design and development sector at the heart of a cross-disciplinary strategy to address a variety of economic, environmental and social aims ranging from the promotion of our culture and heritage to tackling issues such as climate change and fuel poverty. Within the South of Scotland region that I represent, there are some strong examples of how Scottish architects have contributed to these aims. This year, the innovative Abbotsford visitor centre reception, created by LDN Architects, was shortlisted for an RIAS award. The reception building will welcome visitors to one of Scotland’s great cultural sites and provide a symbolic new gateway to the home of Sir Walter Scott near Melrose in the heart of the Scottish Borders. The construction of the centre was part of the extensive refurbishment and repair to Scott’s world-famous home. It is a great example of how modern architecture can enhance and preserve our historical environment and it is expected to draw a great many visitors to that part of Scotland. I commend that building, and indeed all the buildings on the shortlist, to all members.

Will the member take an intervention?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what recent progress it has made in reducing the number of deaths from fires. (S4O-02504)

I welcome those figures from the minister. I hope that the new single service’s focus on front-line activity will help those trends to continue. Does she believe that fire investigation dogs have a role to play in freeing up further resources by uncovering and preventing deliberate fire-raising?

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the recent cashback grant for a young people’s chill-out area at the Dumfries multicultural centre, and would he be willing to visit the young people at the centre once the new facility is up and running?

I, too, compliment the members of the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee on a very interesting and comprehensive report. Reading it through as a non-member of the committee, I learned a great deal. However, it also confirmed many of the issues that constituents who are involved in community transport have raised with me over the years—issues which I, in turn, have raised in the chamber and in correspondence with ministers. South Scotland, which I represent, is one of the most rural areas in Scotland and has not, since the Beeching cuts of the 1960s, been well served by the railway network—notwithstanding the future opening of the Borders railway. In Dumfries and Galloway, the population is declining faster than it is in other parts of the country, the age profile of the population is older than the average, wages are considerably lower than the average, and in an area where car travel is often the only way to get around, petrol prices are much higher than the average. Community transport is therefore vital, so it is heartening, although perhaps not surprising, that there are several vibrant community transport organisations in the region. I will speak tomorrow night at the annual general meeting of one of them, which has already been mentioned by Elaine Murray. It is Annandale Transport Initiative, which is based in Lockerbie and serves a dispersed population in towns and villages including Annan, Gretna, Moffat, Hightae and many other very rural communities. ATI has provided community transport to Annandale since 1999 and hopes to extend its services to Langholm and Eskdale. It has grown from two accessible minibuses to six accessible minibuses and two people carriers. Its service users include 150 registered groups and a number of individual users. There are 40-plus volunteer drivers who are inspiring in their commitment to Annandale Transport Initiative, and the quality of their work is such that the organisation has achieved Investors in People recognition three times. Last summer, I wrote to ministers on behalf of ATI after it raised two areas of concern with me. First, although it is supported by Dumfries and Galloway Council—which I think, compared with many other local authorities, has a good record in community transport—the funding decision maker has become the Annandale and Eskdale area committee. The committee has moved to one-year funding—as has been mentioned by other members—which has caused considerable problems. Also, ATI asked for my support in seeking access to capital to replace its minibuses. Its vehicles all currently have 180,000 miles on the clock and date back as far as 2003. I have raised both those concerns with ministers and I was heartened to receive a letter from the minister, Keith Brown, in July this year in which he refers to the committee report and, in particular, to its recommendation that the Scottish Government consider the development and introduction of a capital funding scheme for purchase of vehicles. I also welcome the minister’s comments today, which give grounds for optimism on that front. I note also that the Scottish Government has responded to the committee report and addressed the two major concerns that were raised by my constituents from Annandale Transport Initiative and by many more; indeed, they were raised by all the local groups that gave evidence to the committee. I am pleased that the Scottish Government response recognises that replacement of vehicles is a key issue and I welcome the fact that Scottish Government officials are working with the third sector to consider how the need to fund new vehicles for community transport might be met. We will hear about the positive outcome of those talks very soon, I hope. That is certainly the view of Annandale Transport Initiative; from speaking to its manager recently, I would say that that outcome cannot come soon enough. She was sitting with six funding applications to charities and foundations as diverse as the Robertson Trust and the People’s Postcode Lottery on her desk. It was mentioned to me that when they have to apply to a diverse range of funders for their funding, they have to repeat over and over again what community transport is to people who are not overly familiar with it. The manager said that it would be much better if they could apply to a fund where people knew the value of what they do and where there were experts who were able to assess their application properly. The committee report talked about how time consuming grant applications can be for small organisations that wish to use their limited resources to deliver services to local people in need. I discovered that Annandale Transport Initiative had employed a specialist to assist in those applications, who of course had to be paid from its revenue funding. That will eat into money for repairs, but it has little alternative because the best solution is replacement vehicles. It is a vicious circle. Mechanical failure can be particularly distressing for vulnerable groups, including people with disabilities, who use the services. I was told of a group who had had a very enjoyable night out at the theatre, only to be unable to access the wheelchair lift at the end because it had got stuck. I welcome the investment in transport that the minister outlined, and I note that this Government’s record investment in transport and the continuation of the concessionary travel scheme have increased the number of bus journeys that are made in South Scotland. Our continued investment in transport is all the more impressive when set against the swingeing Westminster cuts—to which the minister referred—to Scotland’s revenue and capital budgets in recent years. The other main issue that was raised in the committee’s report and by my constituents is short-term funding. I welcome the comments that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth made in the chamber on 1 May this year, in which he acknowledged that short-term funding can make it difficult to plan services, creates additional costs and causes uncertainty for staff. Some of the evidence in the committee’s report about staff receiving yearly redundancy notices was really quite distressing. Mr Swinney said that the Scottish Government is working with stakeholders to try to move the sector back to a three-year funding package. However, as the Scottish Government’s response makes clear, that is a matter for local authorities. I want to put on the record that I think that it is very disappointing that some of the local authorities that shout the loudest about local democracy do not, when they are given complete freedom to spend their grant on local priorities, give priority to volunteer-led third sector organisations—such as community transport initiatives—that are working in the community. I hope that that will change.

I add my congratulations to Aileen McLeod on securing the debate and to Mark Rowe on becoming the first holder of a woodlot licence issued by the Scottish Woodlot Association. I also thank the landowner on the Corsewall estate, Angus Carrick-Buchanan, for having the vision to be involved in this landmark pilot programme. As Aileen McLeod and Jean Urquhart have outlined, the concept of woodlot licences has been inspired by the situation in British Columbia. The benefits there have been considerable and are inspiring. Woodlot licences have enabled local people to manage areas of state forest as small-scale forest enterprises. They have been proven to bring massive benefits to local economy, empowered rural people, and won many awards for excellence in forest management. It is therefore exciting that the Scottish Woodlot Association has been established to take forward the concept in Scotland in the region that I represent. One of my constituents, Andy Brown, will be a leading figure in the pilot, and I take the opportunity to commend the hard work that he, Will Allen, and everyone involved with the Scottish Woodlot Association have put into bringing the project to fruition. Forestry and trees are an important part of our cultural and natural heritage. They inspire artists and connect us with our natural environment. Dumfries and Galloway has a fantastic range of forestry and a rich tapestry of different landscapes, which form an important part of the historic environment, as well as contributing hugely to the economy by supporting both forestry and tourism. Although many of my constituents in the south-west of Scotland rely on woodland in some way, the sad irony is that, until now, few would have the chance to own or manage their own forest. As we have heard, Scotland has the most concentrated forest ownership in Europe. Not for the first time, a glance towards the Nordic countries shows us how things could be done differently and for the better. In those countries forest ownership is dominated by small-scale holdings. As has been said, the average area of private ownership in Norway and Sweden is 40 and 43 hectares respectively, to which our average of 232 hectares does not compare at all favourably. Scottish woodlot licences provide us with an opportunity to right the situation. They will enable individuals, for the first time, to lease woodland, to gain more experience in forestry, and to share this experience with others in a co-operative way. One of the most important advantages of that process is that it will engage young people in the sector. Like most rural communities, many communities across the south of Scotland sometimes struggle to provide sustainable employment and suffer depopulation as a consequence. Although forestry is already integral to the economy of Dumfries and Galloway, too often work such as planting and felling is carried out by contractors who rarely use local labour. Woodlot licences offer fresh hope for keeping people living and working in their communities while maximising the economic and social benefits that forestry can bring to an area. The concept of woodlot licences also fits well with the aims that are set out in Scotland’s first-ever land use strategy. Published in 2011, it outlines principles for sustainable land use and emphasises the importance of linking people with the land, with the overarching aim of bringing about “the beginning of a process which will change the way that we think and the ways that we work.” In Scotland, it is clear that that process has already begun. There is ever-growing support for community ownership and management, and in 2013 more than 200 community groups now manage woodland. I believe that Scotland has an exciting opportunity to take the lead in developing and demonstrating new ways of managing forests, and I await future developments with interest. I would like to wish Mark Rowe, Andy Brown, Will Allen and all those who are involved in the Scottish Woodlot Association all the very best with this worthwhile project.

This week, we are rightly celebrating the magnificent achievement of Professor Higgs of the University of Edinburgh who has been awarded the Nobel prize for physics, so it is appropriate to remember, in this debate on CCS, that another great name associated with Edinburgh was the man who discovered carbon dioxide. Joseph Black, the Professor of Chemistry at both Glasgow and Edinburgh universities in the late 18th century, called the gas that resulted from the combustion of charcoal “fixed air” and noted that it supported neither flame nor animal life—a phrase that perhaps anticipates the threat that CO2 emissions pose to our planet all these years later. Today, that brilliant Scottish enlightenment professor fittingly gives his name to the £1 million Joseph Black laboratory of carbon dioxide chemistry at the University of Edinburgh’s world-leading centre for carbon capture and storage, which was rightly singled out by the minister in his opening speech. The minister talked about Scotland’s comparative advantages in the field of CCS and those advantages were confirmed by the experts working on both the Peterhead and Grangemouth projects who briefed us this morning. As an aside, I will say how pleased I was that the briefing from the Shell project at Peterhead was written and presented by two female professionals. I also congratulate the minister on his comments about women in the oil and gas industry, which were reported in the press today. Along with the existing infrastructure, oil and gas expertise and geological storage opportunities under the North Sea, we must not forget our academic excellence in this field. The centre for carbon capture and storage is the largest research group of its kind in the whole of the UK and acts as a bridge between academia, Government and industry to form a single point of contact—not just for the geosciences and engineering that are required to make it happen, but for the legal and economic aspects of the technology and its environmental and social impact. The SCCS centre has worked closely with the Scottish Government and international partners in, for example, the US, South Korea and Norway as well as with the Global CCS Institute. The centre has 60 business partners and it is currently undertaking work that could create thousands of jobs and add considerably to the wealth of our country. As the minister and others have already mentioned, the centre’s work on enhanced oil recovery from the North Sea offers many opportunities. That technology has already been used in North America. Put into practice in Scotland, the centre’s experts say that the technology could store 75 million tonnes of CO2 from power plants and increase the amount of oil produced from reservoirs beneath the North Sea by 5 per cent, to 25 per cent. To quote Professor Stuart Haszeldine from the SCCS centre: “The North Sea is the most important CO2 storage region for the whole EU, so we propose that it is both possible and necessary to commence small injections of CO2 as soon as possible, to transfer capability from science to industry and build confidence.” Professor Haszeldine has pointed out that Government has a vital role to play in encouraging the development and incentivisation of CCS and just last month he urged delegates at the international conference on the subject in Edinburgh to urge policymakers across the European Union to seize that opportunity to enable Europe to meet its targets for carbon reduction. It is important to emphasise that CCS is not—as some have suggested—a new or experimental technology. The Sleipner scheme in Norway, which has been going since the late 1990s, was the world’s first commercial CO2 storage project. The natural gas that is produced from the Sleipner West field contains up to 9 per cent CO2. However, in order to meet the required export specifications and the customer’s requirements, that must be reduced to a maximum of 2.5 per cent. The CO2 is removed from the produced hydrocarbons at an offshore platform before being pumped back into the ground, and the hydrocarbons are pumped to land. If that process had not been adopted, and the CO2 that was produced was allowed to escape into the atmosphere, the licensees of the Sleipner West project would have to pay 1 million Norwegian kroner a day in CO2 taxes. That emphasises the importance of regulation and the role of the state in encouraging such technologies. Those of us who attended this morning’s briefing heard that Summit Power Group, which is one of the partners in the proposed Grangemouth project and which has already been mentioned today, has the same technology up and running at its plant in Texas. I am not a geoscientist by any stretch of the imagination, but I was fascinated to hear the company’s CEO explain the technology that it is already using in Texas—in particular, the fact that the CO2 and other toxins are removed without actually combusting the coal. I was struck by the CEO’s comments about Summit Power Group’s work with China. He spoke about flying over China and seeing power stations that have numbers rather than names because the Chinese are building coal-fired power stations at a rate of one a week. He concluded his remarks by saying that the world will go on using coal and we will have to find a way of using it more cleanly. That is why this debate is timely, and I hope that we will heed his words.

What does the cabinet secretary see as the main benefits of Scotland’s unique offer of a year of probation, which is offered to all those who qualify?

As you said, Presiding Officer, I am opening the debate in place of Fiona McLeod, who has been taken ill. She sends her apologies to you and to her constituents from Westerton who are in the gallery. Mrs McLeod has lived in Westerton for 50 years. It is Scotland’s first and—some would argue—only true garden suburb, and this debate celebrates its centenary this year. Glasgow Garden Suburb Tenants Ltd was formed as a housing society in 1912, with Sir John Stirling Maxwell as its chairman. The aim was to create co-operatively owned housing communities for the working classes, at affordable prices. The idea had already taken hold in England; it is an import from the south of which I thoroughly approve. The consultant architect for Westerton was Raymond Unwin, from Rotherham in Yorkshire. He studied in Oxford and was inspired by the lectures and ideals of John Ruskin and William Morris. In 1885, he moved to Manchester and became secretary of Morris’s local Socialist League branch. He wrote articles for the league’s newspaper and spoke on street corners. By the time he was consulted about the Westerton scheme, Unwin had designed a model village at New Earswick, near York, for Joseph and Benjamin Rowntree. He also created Letchworth, which was loosely based on the utopian plan of Ebenezer Howard, the father of the garden city movement, and the famous Hampstead garden suburb in north London. Westerton came later. The Scottish architect John Alexander Grant, from the famous firm of Honeyman and Keppie, was the architect on the ground, with Unwin providing oversight and direction. Only 81 of the proposed 120 houses were constructed, as a result of the outbreak of world war 1. The original plans envisaged more than 300 houses, with 120 or so to be built in the initial construction phase on low-lying ground adjacent to the railway station, which of course was vital for the garden suburb. The town took its name from an abandoned farm steading and its foundation stone was laid by Lady Campbell of Succoth on 19 April 1913. By 1915, 84 houses and a shop with a flat above had been completed. Despite the disruption caused by the war, Westerton garden suburb continued to be occupied and managed on a co-partnership basis and more houses were built in the later twentieth century. The tenants co-operative arrangement was so successful that it continued until 1988 when properties were sold to sitting tenants. A strong community identity was fostered and is maintained today. Social events centred on the village hall and the recreation ground were a highlight for many years. The co-operative store was a focus for community activity. On 20 April 2013, the centenary events kicked off and my colleague Fiona McLeod, along with what looked like the whole village, celebrated Westerton turning 100. There was a typical Edwardian afternoon tea and a ceilidh in the evening. Residents kept up the founding principles of Westerton co-operation by mucking in to clean up afterwards. The whole village must have turned out at some point in the day’s festivities. Many people took the time to dress up in Edwardian costumes. There was even a penny-farthing bicycle, which was the icing on the cake. Some of the women, including Mrs McLeod, dressed as suffragettes and chained themselves to the railings. Westerton Care Home was so impressed by the festivities that it asked if it could keep one of the “votes for women” banners from inside the hall to get it framed and erected in the home. Many of the residents of Westerton are here today in the gallery and have been speaking to MSPs at their stand in the members’ lobby. Unwin went on to design other garden suburbs and worked in America. If you will indulge me, Presiding Officer, I would like to say a little about his other main contribution to Scotland, which was in my south of Scotland region. During the first world war he was co-opted by Lloyd George, the Minister for Munitions, to house workers in Gretna. The task facing Lloyd George in those early years of the first world war was considerable. He had to find housing for 20,000 workers in the space of a few months. The munitions factories stretched right across the border and workers, many of whom were women, came from all corners of Scotland. The original garden suburb movement tended to rely either on wealthy patrons, such as Henrietta Barnett in north London, or on people coming together to buy shares in companies, such as the Westerton garden suburb, to provide housing for what we would now call artisan workers. What Gretna, which was built on the same principles as Westerton, showed was that if the Government set its mind to building social housing, that could be achieved. There was the incentive of wartime in Gretna but it did show what could be achieved and that working-class people could have houses with gardens and space in which to live and breathe and bring up their children in a manner that had previously been regarded as utopian. It laid the foundations for future social housing, subsidised by Government, to replace the slums that Westerton was also designed to replace, with a decent subsidy to ensure that people who could not afford middle-class rents could live in decent houses. Westerton and the other garden suburbs provided the foundation for the homes for heroes after the war and for places such as Knightswood, which were built under the Housing (Financial Provisions) Act 1924, known as the Wheatley act. It is rather a shame that after the Wheatley act in 1924 the subsidies for social housing were reduced so that the garden suburb movement petered out and cheaper tenements were thrown up. To some extent, we still live with the legacy of that change today, with the social problems that it caused. The garden suburbs, and Westerton, are a wonderful model of how communities can be planned and created and can grow organically to become real living communities in which we would all be happy to bring up families.

Will the member give way?

On the subject of commercialisation, the member will be aware that Scotland’s fourth leading university, Heriot-Watt University, hosted the converge challenge awards last night and that the University of Edinburgh featured among the prize-winners. The awards, which are funded by, among other sponsors, the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, help academics and researchers take their ideas to market and provide them with considerable backing.

I am delighted to speak in the debate. The subject of learning disability is of considerable personal interest to me because I have a younger sister with Down’s syndrome who uses the services and who will be impacted by the new strategy. I welcome the keys to life strategy and I particularly welcome its being the second learning disability strategy of the Scottish Parliament, which demonstrates the progressive nature of our Parliament. As others have mentioned, the strategy focuses on the health and wellbeing of people with learning disabilities. I want to address that directly. Before I do that, I want to discuss the Labour amendment and comments by Mr Bibby about college education for people with learning disabilities. I have been involved in discussions about that with Enable and the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning; there are genuine concerns about a diminution of college places for people with learning disabilities. On the other hand, learning disabled charities and advocates have been critical of some of the types of courses that were being provided in colleges for people with learning disabilities. The outcomes were not particularly good and the phrase “revolving door” was often used. As a result of the issue having been raised previously in Parliament, I arranged for Enable to meet the cabinet secretary. A very successful meeting went ahead in March this year, at which the cabinet secretary agreed to fund the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability and Enable to do joint work on developing a guidance document for further education colleges. It is important to remember that the decisions were made at college level before college reform. At that meeting, it was agreed to support the roll-out of Enable Scotland’s transitions to employment model in the academic year 2013-14. Only this morning, I had an email from Jan Savage of Enable to say: “I thought that you might like an update on the further education project we have been working on further to the Cabinet Secretary’s announcement”. She went on to say: “We have agreed partnerships with 7 Further Education colleges (Borders, Kilmarnock, West Lothian, Perth, Aberdeen, Dundee and Forth Valley) and are ready to deliver the Transitions to Employment programme.” They just need to have it passed by the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. There have been difficulties at college level and we must not take our eye off the ball, but it is important to acknowledge that those issues have been addressed by the Government and that progress is being made.

Well, £250 million is a significant sum of money. It is important that the cabinet secretary has listened to what Enable Scotland and the Scottish Consortium for Learning Disability are saying and has ensured that the quality of the courses that are provided is improved. Colleges have an obligation to deliver equality outcomes. If colleges are not doing so, the funding council should be alerted to that, because everyone is entitled to an education. On the keys to life strategy, I want to address the very alarming statistic that people with learning disabilities live on average 20 years less than the general population. I particularly welcome recommendation 11, which instructs “the Scottish Learning Disability Observatory ... to develop a better understanding of the causes of unnecessary deaths”. Of course, the reasons for early death are complex. People with learning disabilities can have, for example, very serious congenital heart disease and thyroid problems. In addition to major health challenges, learning disabled people may not in the past have received the treatment that they needed to address relatively minor health problems, which can, as a result, become major health problems. That can be partly explained by the difficulty in getting them the specialised treatment that they need. For example, how do staff take blood from a person whom they suspect is anaemic or is suffering from some other condition if the person is petrified of needles and lacks the capacity to rationalise the need to give blood? What do they do if a person needs an operation to improve their quality of life but is phobic about hospitals? How do they reassure a person who has difficulty in communicating their fears or describing their symptoms? I have experience of families who have suffered from such problems. Twenty years ago nothing was done and such families were isolated and marginalised. Now we have specialist community learning disability teams, who have made an enormous difference to the healthcare of that section of the population. That is a result of the previous strategy. I have direct experience of the Inverclyde community learning disability team at the Elizabeth Martin clinic, in Larkfield, and I praise the team, which has made an enormous difference to the lives of the disabled people with whom it deals. Consultant psychiatrists, psychologists, community nurses, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, speech and language therapists, counsellors, multidisciplinary social workers, dieticians and chiropodists work together. It is important that people who have a learning disability have access to familiar professionals and continuity of care, in an holistic approach. The delivery of medical care to some people who have a learning disability can be a slow process that requires an enormous amount of patience, understanding and flexibility on the part of health professionals. I know a learning-disabled person who broke her foot and had to have it in plaster. The traditional way of removing a stookie—to use a good Glasgow word—is for the person to go to hospital and have it sawn off, but that would have been terrifying for the individual. However, the flexible support that the specialist nurse and physiotherapist could offer was such that the team was able to remove the plaster in the individual’s home. That is just one example of an advance that has been made. I am running out of time.

I want to draw attention to the GP contract. Some people who have a learning disability have communication difficulties, so it is important that they get longer GP appointments. I praise that recommendation.

Will the member take an intervention?

I agree with Margaret McDougall on the iniquity of zero-hours contracts. However, does she not recognise that employment law is reserved to the United Kingdom Government?

Scotland is a wealthy and productive country, replete with natural resources. In addition to those blessings, which make us one of the world’s richest nations, we have enormous strength in the most vital commodity—human capital. Scotland’s greatest resource is her people. Like Alison Johnstone, I will concentrate on the contribution of more than half of those people: the 52 per cent who are female. Women make up 48 per cent of the labour market in Scotland. However, a recent OECD study on the world economy indicated that around one third to one half of all valuable economic activity—often conducted by women—is not accounted for in traditional measures of performance such as GDP. I am delighted that the Scottish Government intends to address that issue in its national performance framework and that more will be done to recognise work that is not subject to traditional monetary transactions, such as that done by Scotland’s 675,000 unpaid carers, 60 per cent of whom are female. This Parliament has proved itself to be progressive. If it made all the decisions about Scotland, as opposed to only some, our country would be more prosperous and more equal. Women in particular would benefit because, for all the considerable advances that we have made, women have not yet achieved full equality under Westminster government. For every £1 that a man in the UK earns, a woman takes home 85p. Women’s average personal pensions are only 62 per cent of the average for men, and women make up the majority of pensioners who live below the breadline. I note that these areas of policy—pensions, employment and equal opportunities—are central to the economic wellbeing of women and they are all controlled from London. By contrast, fairness and equality have been central to the progressive policy advances of devolution. The Scottish social wage—promoted and delivered by the SNP—has been particularly beneficial to women. Earlier this week, I wrote about what Americans define as the sandwich generation—middle-aged people, often women, who find themselves supporting elderly parents and their own children. I met one of those busy people at a conference in Stirling last Saturday and she spoke eloquently of the pressures that she faces. However, that lady pointed out that things are a bit easier in Scotland under an SNP Government. She does not have to worry about finding tuition fees to send her children to university or paying for the personal care of her elderly parents. Poverty damages the economy and the best way out of poverty is through well-paid work. Therefore, I am delighted that, last year, the Government in Scotland held a women’s employment summit in conjunction with the STUC. I also welcome the commitment to 600 hours of flexible free childcare in the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. That will allow many more mothers to work as well as providing women with jobs in the sector. However, we could do much more with the full economic levers of independence. A no vote means no change to the economic position of women. London exacerbates female poverty with austerity, which damages recovery. The UK Government’s response to the economic crisis has been to cut public sector jobs, two out of three of which have been done by women. In Scotland, the SNP Government and its agencies have a no compulsory redundancies policy, which has benefited women in that part of the public sector.

Those job losses were negotiated—they were not compulsory redundancies. That is the big difference. [Interruption.]

Westminster’s Welfare Reform Act 2012 has, as successive London budgets, autumn statements and spending reviews have done, had a disproportionate and detrimental impact on women. According to the Fawcett Society, one fifth of women’s income is made up of welfare payments and tax credits, whereas the figure for men is one tenth. That means that benefits make up twice as much of women’s income as they do of men’s. To date, a total of £14.9 billion-worth of Westminster cuts per year have been made to benefits, tax credits, pay and pensions. According to the Fawcett Society, a staggering 74 per cent of that has been taken from women’s incomes, and that calculation was done before George Osborne announced that a further £10 billion of welfare cuts would be made by 2016-17. With control over benefits here in Scotland, we could ensure that more women were economically active and, with control of the equalities legislation, which the Fawcett Society has warned is being rolled back at UK level, we could examine ways in which the economic position of women in Scotland could be enhanced. I was particularly struck by the evidence that Professor Sara Carter gave to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee last week, to which Alison Johnstone referred. She said that if the rate of business ownership by men was equalled by the women’s rate, we would see growth in the Scottish economy of 5.3 per cent or £7.6 billion. That is a staggering figure, but it can be achieved only in a society that supports women, and that will be a society that promotes equality and fairness. An independent Scotland will do just that. We can improve on Westminster. Earlier this year, the feminist economist Ailsa McKay gave the David Hume lecture. The fact that she said that she was excited about the debate that we are having on independence and what it can do for the Scottish economy answers some of the criticisms that have been made by Opposition members. She said that she could see the possibility of change and of practical improvement to ordinary lives. She said: “The forthcoming referendum on Independence and the associated ongoing constitutional futures debates provide further opportunities to ‘think big’ ... The challenge then is how best to capitalize on those opportunities for the purpose of transforming our economic institutions and systems in ways that promote the welfare of all of Scotland’s people.”

The member makes a good point about women in life sciences. Does he agree that, if the Parliament had full tax powers, we could provide incentives to the very industries that he is talking about?

11. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the Joint Committee on Vaccination & Immunisation’s decision not to recommend the introduction of the meningitis B vaccine. (S4O-02392)

I have constituents who have lost children to that terrible disease, and who are disappointed with the JCVI’s initial decision not to recommend the vaccine. If that decision is not reversed, could Scotland consider acting alone in vaccinating children against meningitis B?

I congratulate Christina McKelvie on bringing this debate to the Parliament, and I commend Scottish Women’s Aid for raising awareness through its campaign. This is not an easy subject to discuss and debate, but it is important that we speak about it, because revenge porn, like every other form of porn, is a way of degrading and abusing—and therefore controlling—women. The Women’s Aid briefing on the matter contains the shocking revelation that women who are subjected to revenge porn are often asked why they consented to the images being made in the first place. I agree with Christina McKelvie that that is a classic case of blaming the victim. It is quite clear that in such cases consent is limited and does not extend to the sharing of images with anyone other than the person involved—and certainly not with the wider public, let alone the world, via the internet. I am pleased that there are legal remedies. Unlike some countries, such as Germany, Scotland does not have a law that was drafted specifically to deal with revenge porn. However, we have a number of other laws. As Jackie Baillie said, perhaps not enough people access the legal remedies. I commend Women’s Aid for explaining the remedies that people have, such as recourse under public indecency, breach of the peace and other offences under the Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010 or the Communications Act 2003. The stop revenge porn website tells readers that a precedent was set in 2012 when a man was prosecuted in Dundee for posting images of his ex-partner on Facebook. There are also civil remedies, such as interdicts and defamation actions. The provision of such guidance is a way of empowering people, which is vital in the context of crimes in which the perpetrators set out to disempower and humiliate women. The website also contains an uplifting and affirmative message to victims who, because of social norms, often blame themselves: “It’s not you who should have known better. It’s not you who was silly. You are never to blame. You are never wrong to make an intimate moment with someone. They are wrong ... if they abuse/share this or threaten to do so!” I would like to say something about revenge porn in its wider context. We cannot separate it from the growth of pornography generally. The biggest porn industry is in America, partly because of the size of the market and partly because of the constitutional right to free speech, which has been exploited by pornographers. Now that the internet crosses national boundaries and most of the big internet service providers operate according to American norms, we have seen an explosion of pornography around the world. According to one estimate, there are nearly 25 million porn sites worldwide and they make up 12 per cent of all websites. Sebastian Anthony, writing for ExtremeTech, reports that Xvideos is the biggest porn site on the web, receiving 4.4 billion page views and 350 million unique visits a month. It is estimated to account for 30 per cent of all web traffic. Is it any wonder, therefore, that broader online culture is also deeply sexist? We got a glimpse of that recently in the Twitter row when women were abused simply for campaigning to have a female image on Bank of England notes. It was indicative of a much larger problem. I finish by quoting Danielle Keats Citron, professor of law at the University of Maryland, who has extensively researched the subject. She writes: “The harassment of women online is a pernicious and widespread problem. It can be severe, involving threats of sexual violence, doctored photographs of women being suffocated, postings of women’s home addresses alongside the suggestion that they should be raped, and technological attacks that shut down feminist blogs and websites.” She goes on to say that “Cyber harassment is a uniquely gendered phenomenon”— its victims are, overwhelmingly, female, just as about 85 per cent of users of pornography are male. At the heart of revenge porn, therefore, lies the problem of male attitudes to women. Until we manage to tackle that effectively and to challenge misogyny wherever we find it, this phenomenon will not disappear.

I welcome the Government’s ambitious strategy for Scotland’s historic environment over the next 10 to 15 years. I am delighted that we have the opportunity to debate the future of our historic environment and celebrate it as a cornerstone of our cultural identity. At this juncture in Scotland’s story, it is important that we build on our rich heritage and cultural confidence. The strategy defines the historic environment as “the evidence for human activity that connects people with place, and includes the associations we can see, feel and understand.” The Scots are connected to our history and cultural identity by the environment that surrounds us. We are blessed with numerous cultural assets and our tangible history gives us a strong sense and understanding of who we are and where we came from—a distinct Scottish identity. As Liz Smith said about James IV in her excellent debut speech as the new culture spokesman for the Scottish Conservatives, that identity draws on outside influences from throughout Europe as well as influences from within Scotland. My constituency office is located in Dumfries, where the earliest evidence of human activity dates back more than 6,000 years. The contrast between the town’s medieval origins—reflected in the street plan of its historic town centre—and the Georgian town houses that also characterise the area reflect two strands in Scotland’s history. The age of Bruce, who clashed with Red Comyn in the centre of Dumfries at Greyfriars kirk and launched the wars of independence, is juxtaposed with the genteel classicism associated with the first four monarchs of the House of Hanover. The Bruce trail, established in 2009, was the result of tireless work by members of the Bruce Trust and has proven an important local asset for tourism and education. The group of dedicated volunteers drew together all the places in the region that have strong connections with Bruce, whose family home for centuries was in Annandale, first in Annan and then in Lochmaben. There is an unsurpassed living history in the area. On Dumfries High Street, the Globe Inn is renowned the world over as the chosen watering hole of Scotland’s national poet during his lifetime. The cabinet secretary visited the Globe Inn last year for the launch of the big Burns supper festival. Inside the historic pub, I know that she very much enjoyed being able to sit in Burns’s favourite seat, which still survives, as does some of his poetry, etched into the glass of his bedroom window with a diamond-tipped stylus. About 6 miles north-west of the town lies Ellisland, the farm that Burns built and inhabited with his wife Jean Armour and their young son. The home where Burns composed more than 130 songs and poems remains as a lovingly preserved local landmark today, thanks to the dedication of another voluntary group, the Friends of Ellisland, which has overseen the careful restoration of the farm over the past 80 years. The farm is available for hire for functions and forms a very nice background to Burns suppers. At a time when our heritage faces significant challenges, from the current economic position to the impact of climate change, we need to take action to maintain its management. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s assurances regarding the proposed merger of Historic Scotland and the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland. I agree that it will “achieve a more ... sustainable ... heritage service for the nation, rather than ... generate financial savings.” That is an appropriate sentiment and it stands in stark contrast to the attitude of the United Kingdom Government’s culture secretary Maria Miller, who has made it clear that she sees culture solely as an economic commodity. However, it must be said that the merger will also bring sustainability in the face of a Scottish Government budget cut of 12.3 per cent in real terms. Glancing at the responses to the Government’s consultation, which were published last week, I was pleased to see the number of community organisations that added their voices to the conversation. That matters, as our strategy for the future needs to be collectively owned. I have spoken of the voluntary groups in the region that I represent that play a vital role in maintaining valued historic landmarks, and I welcome the opportunities that are presented to them in the proposed community empowerment and renewal bill, which aims to make it easier for communities to take on public sector assets. That goes hand in hand with one of the main principles of the new strategy, which emphasises the need to empower communities across the country to take a more active role in caring for their local heritage. I believe that offering local people the opportunity to make that choice for their communities will help to ensure that grass-roots and authentic Scottish identity and history are preserved. Nurturing networks across communities and the public, private and third sectors and giving everyone a stake in the future of our culture will also mean that it will be collectively valued for generations to come. The draft strategy is an important step along the road to matching the vision for culture and heritage in an independent Scotland that the cabinet secretary set out in her address at the Talbot Rice gallery—that Scotland will be a “proud and confident nation, rooted in culture and heritage, where we not only cherish our diverse traditions, but continually seek to create opportunities to share and celebrate.”

I welcome the comments from Paul Little, the principal of the City of Glasgow College, who said that the college merger has created a “world-class institution”. Does the cabinet secretary believe that the merger has created a college that is better able to deliver courses in line with skills demand? [Interruption.]

Amendment 100 is a probing amendment. It is supported by the NUS, which, like me, is looking for reassurances from the cabinet secretary. The NUS recognises the concern about the pay gap between senior management and workers in the universities sector. In Scotland, the gap is a ratio of 1:16. The situation is out of step with Scotland’s egalitarian education tradition. The pay differential in universities is higher than that in the public sector as a whole. It is wider than the gap between a four-star general and a private in the army, and it is wider than the gap between the national health service chief executive and a hospital porter. The average pay for a university principal is £240,000, which is far in excess of what the United Kingdom Prime Minister earns. It is all the more worrying when we consider that a recent NUS survey seemed to indicate that some universities in Scotland are not paying their lowest-paid members of staff the living wage. Amendment 100 does not seek to dictate the salaries of university principals. It seeks to ensure that staff and students are represented on the universities’ remuneration committees. From the start of the process, the cabinet secretary made it clear that the chair’s job was not to rewrite the original von Prondzynski report but, rather, to find a way in which to take his recommendations and apply them across the sector through a code. The consultation period on the draft code closed last week, and it is disappointing that the final code will not be published until after the stage 3 proceedings. I do not think that I am alone in thinking that the chairs of university courts who first gave evidence to the Education and Culture Committee were not particularly conciliatory. Indeed, their position on consultation with other stakeholders did not inspire confidence. I was more encouraged by the constructive attitude of Sir Robert Smith, who, at a later evidence session, agreed to speak to the staff representatives about the code. As things stand, the proposed code makes no reference to staff and students in its discussion of remuneration, other than to note that remuneration panels should be careful not to agree severance packages that staff and students might find excessive. The code should go further than that. I would like the cabinet secretary to state his position on the presence of staff and students on remuneration panels and what message he would intend us to send to universities on the subject of executive pay. Like everyone else in this chamber, I am very proud of the performance of our universities and their ranking in international league tables. At the same time, they must remember that they are in receipt of large amounts of public money, which brings with it certain responsibilities. Universities in Scotland are not businesses; they are learning communities, and staff and students are key members of those communities, who should be treated as such by management.

Not moved. Amendment 100 moved—[Neil Findlay].

I previously wrote to the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth about the plight of the Annandale Transport Initiative, whose fleet of buses desperately needs to be renewed. Are Government discussions with the Community Transport Association and the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations likely to result in the establishment of a fund to help groups such as the Annandale Transport Initiative to replace vehicles?

I am delighted to speak in a debate that is about celebrating and building on Scotland’s success in youth sport. I will focus on how youth sport is being supported in the south-west of Scotland, although I should say to my constituents that anything that I say will only scratch the surface of what is going on in the region. Dumfries and Galloway has benefited from the cashback for communities fund. There has been Government investment of £1 million in three third-generation pitches, in Annan, Dumfries and Stranraer. Annan Athletic Football Club unveiled its new 3G pitch—the first of its kind in Dumfries and Galloway—in December 2012. The pitch was funded by sportscotland and Dumfries and Galloway Council, as well as the Government. The Scottish Football Association played a key role in advising the Government about where to allocate funding. I have been to Annan Athletic’s ground, and the pitch is certainly being well used for community activities and youth development. Annan Athletic has first-class community engagement, and the new surface will facilitate a massive increase in capacity, enabling all sections of the club to grow. Easy as it is to get carried away talking about football after Scotland’s recent win against Croatia, I do not want to concentrate on football. I want to talk about a sport in which Scotland regularly reaches world-class heights: curling. There is disagreement about the origins of the sport. In his 1884 book, “Curling: the Ancient Scottish Game”, Dr James Taylor wrote: “There is good reason to believe that Curling originated in Scotland, probably in the south-western district of the country, which has always been its stronghold.” However, I am aware that the Netherlands and Belgium have a strong claim as the home of curling. What cannot be disputed is Scotland’s pre-eminence in the game and the south-west of Scotland’s disproportionate contribution to getting Scotland to that position. Scottish women are world champions at the moment, and the team’s skipper, Eve Muirhead, is certainly in the running to be Scottish sports personality of the year. Eve Muirhead curls with the Dunkeld curling club, which is based in Pitlochry. Less well known is that her teammates all hail from the south-west of Scotland. They include: Anna Sloan, who is 18 and comes from Lockerbie, who plays third for Eve’s junior rink and skips her own ladies rink; Vicki Adams, who plays second, who is 23 and comes from Stranraer; and Claire Hamilton, who is also 23 and is from Dumfries, and who currently plays lead for the Scottish champion rink. Hamilton was a member of the Anna Sloan rink that won the gold medal for Great Britain in the 2011 winter universiade. Hamilton played for the team’s alternate and also played third for Sloan that year. The girls are looking forward to the winter Olympics in 2014 in Sochi in Russia. Scotland, England and Wales all compete separately in international curling. By an agreement between the curling federations of those three home nations, only Scotland can score qualification points on behalf of Great Britain—because, obviously, we are the best. Team GB has qualified for the 2014 Olympics and is currently standing third in the world. This morning, I was pleased to receive an email from Anna Sloan of the women’s champion team, in which she reflected on the importance of good facilities in building her expertise. Anna trains at home from Wednesday to Saturday, mainly at DGOne and the David Keswick centre in Dumfries. In the lead-up to the Olympics she will be based in Stirling during the winter. Both she and her teammate Claire Hamilton said that their success in curling was due to their families and to the tradition in the south-west. She said that it seemed only natural that she curled; all her cousins did, too. She began her training at the Lockerbie ice rink, which reopened this year after receiving a sportscotland investment of £214,000 to enhance its facilities. That shows the worth of investing in tradition. There is a tradition of curling in south-west Scotland, probably in the same way that there is a tradition of cross-country skiing in Norway or of long-distance running in the Horn of Africa. Therefore, I would welcome the minister’s assurance that we will also invest in our traditional strengths here in Scotland by considering the inclusion of curling in the draft youth sports strategy. The motion and amendments rightly draw attention to the Commonwealth games and their legacy. I want to make mention of some of the world-class winter sports events that will take place in the south-west next year, on which my colleague Aileen McLeod has already touched. In April and May 2014 the Dumfries ice bowl will host the curling world championship mixed doubles and the curling world championship senior men and women’s events. Those events are expected to attract at least 7,000 visitors to Dumfries next year and will help to build on Dumfries ice bowl’s vision of striving to be the leading ice sport venue in Scotland. The ice bowl has recently seen considerable upgrading to its curling rink and its stones. It is also home to the Solway Sharks ice hockey team—the current English national league north division cup winners and division 2 champions—which has won 10 major titles since 1997. Aileen McLeod spoke about the 2012 active games. I am delighted that the ice bowl next year will add to that, not just with curling but with the under-18 and under-20 ice hockey male championships. I was delighted this year to attend an event that encourages local people to volunteer for ice bowl events. Those volunteering roles will include school visits, school liaison and coaching. Curling is coming home to the south-west of Scotland next year and I am sure that everyone in the chamber will welcome that.

Can the cabinet secretary tell us how the new Police Scotland will help in the policing of common riding events across southern Scotland? Can he confirm my understanding that there is no charge for policing such community events?

I, too, welcome the campaigners to the gallery, particularly the petitioner Susan Archibald. I had the great pleasure of hearing Susan speak at the recent demonstration against Trident in Glasgow and she was very eloquent about the scandal of paying for nuclear weapons on the one hand, while on the other hand vulnerable and disabled people, including those who suffer from chronic pain, are being punished by welfare cuts and the bedroom tax. Before directly addressing the motion, I want to talk about priorities in much the same way that Susan Archibald talked about priorities in condemning at that demonstration the amount that is being spent on Trident. With regard to the availability on prescription of paracetamol and aspirin-based painkillers in the NHS, some have suggested recently that as prescriptions are now free in Scotland, prescribing such medicines is a waste of money. However, this debate might offer the opportunity to remind ourselves that chronic pain is a very serious condition that requires medication and painkillers and that it would be wrong to punish those who have such a serious condition by charging them for their care. Of course, chronic pain is a long-term condition and the plight of those who suffer from such conditions was recently highlighted in a report called “Paying the Price: Prescription Charges and People with Long-Term Conditions”, which examined the effects of prescription charges in England. The report was written by the prescription charges coalition, which comprises 20 organisations, including Arthritis Care, the National Rheumatoid Arthritis Society and Disability Rights UK, that represent patients, many of whom suffer from chronic pain. Of the 4,000 people who were surveyed, 73 per cent paid for their prescriptions and 35 per cent of those people had on occasion failed to pick up a prescription because of cost. The same issue is reflected in other polls; for example, a MORI survey for Citizens Advice found that in 2007 800,000 people in England had failed to collect a prescription because of cost—and, as we know, the cost has risen considerably since then. Although we are looking at the work that needs to be done and indeed the work that has already been done to develop specialised services for those with chronic pain, we should not overlook the benefits that the introduction of free prescriptions has brought to such patients.

No—I want to make progress. I am fortunate in not having suffered serious illness in my life; indeed, I have experienced severe pain on only two or three occasions as a result of toothache and childbirth, both of which thankfully ended quickly. However, I know people who suffer from chronic pain and have seen how dreadful and debilitating it can be. In my experience, although it can be managed with good services, the individual can become completely housebound and isolated and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to community-based services, primary care services and a social model of care. For some sufferers, that is the only method of delivery that they would be able to access. I am very glad that the cabinet secretary intends to end the situation in which unwell people travel to Bath in Somerset. I am told that Bath is a very attractive city—indeed, it is still on my list of those that I wish to visit—but it should be visited voluntarily and for pleasure, not out of necessity.

The member makes a reasonable point; indeed, I was just about to address the substance of her comment. I welcome the fact that the cabinet secretary will consult on the type of residential treatment that will be delivered in Scotland. That seems eminently sensible because having only one centre in the central belt, no matter how specialised it might be, could mean long and uncomfortable journeys from the far north of Scotland and indeed from less accessible parts of the south of Scotland area that I represent. I am encouraged by what is happening across the country to deliver care to people where they live, and by Aileen McLeod’s comments about the considerable progress that is being made in Dumfries and Galloway to establish a service improvement group. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to reducing waiting times and agree that the integration of health and social care, on which we will legislate, is particularly relevant to chronic pain sufferers. As the cabinet secretary said, it is important to give sufferers a real say in how their services are delivered. It is important to remember the progress that has been made to date. In 2007, only one NHS board had a pain management programme; in 2013, five boards have a pain management programme. As has been said, from April 2014 every health board will be required to produce a chronic pain service delivery plan. Seventy-five per cent of the adult population of Scotland now have access to a pain management programme, and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to raising that figure to 100 per cent. It is clear from the cabinet secretary’s comments that the Scottish Government is committed to enhancing the provision of chronic pain services and building on the improvements that have been made. I welcome Opposition members’ acknowledgment of the sincerity of the cabinet secretary’s commitment. That spirit of respect and co-operation will help us to build on the progress that has been made to date.

I reiterate the comments praising my colleague Adam Ingram. I take this opportunity to thank Russel Griggs, my constituent, for the hard work that he has put in to finding solutions to what are very complex problems. I ask the minister to give us an update on the situation in Glenmuckloch, in particular with regard to any jobs that could be generated by the restoration of the opencast site there.

I was lucky enough to spend this morning at Butterdean wood in East Lothian with a group of delightful four and five-year-olds from the Compass School in Haddington. With the help of the Woodland Trust, which owns Butterdean, the children joined me in planting Scots pine saplings to highlight the debate. Representatives of the Woodland Trust are in the gallery, along with representatives of the Scottish Woodlot Association, Scottish Environment LINK, the RSPB and the Borders Forest Trust. They all support the campaign for a national tree, as do Trees for Life, the Scottish Wildlife Trust, the John Muir Trust and the Royal Scottish Forestry Society. It was wonderful to share the children’s excitement. Woodlands are the most stimulating playgrounds of all. There was much chatter about whether we might spot a gruffalo. Apparently, it was lying low today, but the children had a great time with their saplings and spades. Woodlands foster a sense of wellbeing for people of all ages—that is scientifically proven. In fact, Forestry Commission Scotland has a highly successful project called branching out that offers patients a therapeutic programme of activities from simply walking in the woods to building bird boxes and clearing rhododendrons. As a child, I was of the generation that planted a tree in 73, which was a massive United Kingdom drive to make good the devastation of Dutch elm disease. I still remember the excitement of getting our very own sapling. At that time, there were very few trees in our housing scheme, which was made up of the 1950s pebbledash houses that are typical of post-war urban Scotland. Now the trees that we planted are mature—as, unfortunately, am I—but the greenery has transformed Midton in Gourock into something of a leafy suburb. Trees give a sense of place and of permanence. Perhaps it was that childhood memory that attracted me to Alex Hamilton’s petition, which calls on the Parliament to “urge the Scottish Government, as a symbolic commitment to our woodlands and natural heritage, to proclaim the Scots Pine as the National Tree of Scotland.” I point out that that demand is non-political—we are asking for a national tree, not a nationalist tree—so I would welcome clarification from the minister of the civil servant’s letter to the Public Petitions Committee that seemed to suggest that we must await the outcome of next year’s referendum before we make a decision. Scotland is already a nation, and we can choose appropriate symbols whenever we want—we already have the saltire and the thistle, of course. This year of natural Scotland is an ideal time to name our nation’s tree. I must admit that I originally thought that legislating on the matter was a bit like using a sledgehammer to crack a pine cone, if members will pardon the pun, but it seems that, around the world, that is how it is done. The maple was proclaimed the official tree of Canada only in 1996, and in the United States there were three resolutions in the House and Senate before a bill was signed by the President in 2003 that elevated the oak to the status of the American eagle. What is the point of having a national arboreal emblem, as they prefer to call it across the Atlantic? Well, it gets people talking, and if that talk leads to action in preserving and planting woodland, it can help to combat climate change. In the last century, global forest cover dropped from 50 per cent of the world’s land area to 30 per cent. I know that the Scottish Government has a very ambitious target for planting, so any interest that helps to support that objective must be good. Woodland also supports wildlife. The Galloway forest park in my region is home to red kite, barn owls and golden eagles. The remnants of the ancient Caledon forest further north shelter the capercaillie, the unique Scottish crossbill and mammals such as the pine marten, and, of course, the red squirrel, which we all love, survives in pockets across Scotland, thanks to our forests. Woodlands are vital to the rural economy. The forestry industry is an economic success story that we do not shout about often enough. I know that the minister was as impressed as I was with the advanced technology that we saw at the James Jones & Sons sawmill in Lockerbie when we visited it a few months ago. Woodlands are vital to tourism. They form the backdrop to increasingly popular activity holidays. The Seven Stanes mountain bike trails in the Borders and Dumfries and Galloway are a great example of that growth area. If we think globally for a moment, designating a national tree would help the country to enhance its international brand. Although that brand is already very strong, there is no reason why we cannot strengthen it further. In my view, the Scots pine seems ideal for that purpose. It is named after us, at least in the English-speaking world, and, unlike the birch and the oak, it has not been claimed by anyone else. Aesthetically, the strong silhouette of the Scots pine lends itself to graphic reproduction and, of course, it features in many famous paintings and photographs of Scotland’s landscape. The Scots pine came top of the Woodland Trust’s online poll to find a national tree and I can exclusively reveal that it is the front-runner in a separate poll that is being conducted by the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh for the year of natural Scotland. The Scottish Forestry Commission’s submission to the Public Petitions Committee noted that the image of the pine is the most downloaded from its website. The Scots pine has many legendary properties and was planted on the graves of fallen Celtic warriors in ancient times. However, it is also modern. It comes in many guises; it can be tall and straight or broad and spreading with multiple trunks, and its bark ranges in colour from orange and red to grey. Although its presence here goes back to the ice age, it is a perfect representative of today’s diverse modern Scotland in all its variety. The pine also encourages a unique biodiversity. If anyone wants to know more, I recommend that they consult the Trees for Life website, which talks about the Scots pine canopy encouraging blaeberries, cowberries and even rare orchids in the shade of the trees. The Scots pine is iconic. Although it does not grow naturally elsewhere in the United Kingdom or indeed Ireland, it is the most widely distributed conifer in the world, stretching from Scandinavia to southern Spain and from Ardnamurchan to eastern Siberia. In that respect, it evokes the Scottish human diaspora, which is also widely scattered, and would therefore be a perfect ambassador for a country whose people have made such a mark on this world.

I thank the member for arming me with that kind of evidence, which I am sure will be very useful in the future. Is she aware that it took three goes in the American Senate and House of Representatives to get the American national tree through and that all three attempts were held up in committee? If the Americans can eventually get there, perhaps we can as well.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what progress it has made on implementing “Scotland’s Digital Future—Infrastructure Action Plan”. (S4O-02118)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of recent reports of difficulties facing the broadband pilot project in Annan in the South Scotland region? Can she update us on any discussions that she has had on that matter?

I, too, congratulate my colleague Aileen McLeod on securing the debate. I echo her comments about the hard work and dedication of the South Rhins Community Development Trust, which has led to the successful award to purchase 30 acres of the Mull of Galloway for the community. I also welcome Maureen and Sammy Chand and Brian Collins to the Scottish Parliament. I am sure that they take great pleasure in the fact that Ms McLeod’s debate has changed from one supporting the bid to one celebrating its success. I extend and echo her congratulations to Kathleen and Steve Hardy. I heard Mr Hardy on Radio Scotland this morning, and I thought that he gave a very impressive articulation of the community’s vision for the Mull of Galloway. There is much to be celebrated about this part of Scotland. It is our Land’s End—our unspoiled Land’s End—as other members have said, and it is dominated by the magnificent Stevenson lighthouse. As an aside for those who are unable to travel immediately to the Mull of Galloway, I can recommend the lighthouse webcam, which was commissioned by the Northern Lighthouse Board, showing the view from the tower. Those who watch it long enough can perhaps spot the school of whales. However, I would recommend visiting the place, which is so stunning, as Aileen McLeod said. Scotland is known for the beauty of its landscape, and today’s debate is a great opportunity to remind visitors and Scots that much of that stunning and dramatic landscape is found in the south of the country as well as in the Highlands, which perhaps get a little bit more attention. For that reason, it gives me particular pleasure to note that a remote rural community in the far south of Scotland is benefiting from one of the first grants from the Scottish Government-backed Scottish land fund. It is just over a year since the Government launched the £6 million fund, which aims to give communities the means to take over the land where they live. Land ownership builds independent, resilient rural communities, and it creates a great sense of confidence and community empowerment. When the fund was launched last year, the Minister for Environment and Climate Change at the time, Stewart Stevenson, said: “this fund will help more of our rural areas to take control of their own destinies” and to flourish. I have every confidence that the community at the Mull of Galloway will maximise the natural advantages and pristine beauty that the Rhins of Galloway already possess. The success of community ownership is closely associated with the success of the Scottish Parliament. There has been verification from academic research. Dr Sarah Skerratt of the Scottish Agricultural College—now the Scottish Rural University College, or SRUC—visited 17 community land trusts as part of a project that had been commissioned by the Parliament. She was clear in her conclusions, which were based on evidence that she had gathered at first hand, mainly in the north and west of the country, that community land ownership leads to “more vibrant” rural communities. Now that the Mull of Galloway is soon to be bought for the benefit of its people, the benefits of community ownership will be felt from Scotland’s beautiful southern tip to its northern crofting townships. That is very appropriate, and it is something that all of us in the Parliament can be proud of.

Will the member take an intervention?

There can be absolutely no doubt that this Government has demonstrated its commitment to childcare and early years. The 20 per cent increase in free nursery provision since the SNP came to power in 2007 is a real achievement, particularly as the Scottish Government has faced the biggest financial squeeze experienced by any Government in this Parliament since the beginning of devolution. The Scottish Government is building on that record and demonstrating its ambition with the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, which will result in a 45 per cent increase in free childcare since 2007. That will benefit around 120,000 children and save families around £700 per child per year. By increasing to a minimum of 600 hours the amount of funded hours that three and four-year-old children, as well as vulnerable two-year-olds, are entitled to, the bill will mean that Scotland has the best provision in the UK. Childcare must be viewed in its broadest sense, and the bill does that. We need to help families to get out of poverty by enabling women to work and to retain more of their earnings, but we also need to provide the best-quality childcare.

That is a constituency matter that is outwith my region. I am speaking about the Government’s ambition for childcare. The member should probably raise that issue with NHS Lothian. Childcare is about providing the best quality of education and developmental care, as well as helping people out of poverty. In the past, we have had too strict a dividing line between early years childcare and early years education. Parents often have to choose between flexible private childcare and free nursery education. Flexible private childcare is often expensive and is perhaps not always the best quality educationally, but it provides parents with the opportunity to drop off their kids before 9, say, and collect them after 5, whereas early years education such as that provided by many local authority nurseries is of a high standard, but is not provided in a way that suits working parents. It is important that we break down the barriers between those two types of early years provision. I think that the minister is committed to doing that and that the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill will deliver it. In the past, opponents of the Government have suggested that the Government did not need to legislate for additional hours, but I am pleased that more of a consensus seems to be emerging on that point. Of the respondees to the consultation exercise on the bill, the vast majority, about three quarters, agreed that the number of hours should be increased and even more, about 83 per cent, agreed that flexibility should be improved. However, many respondents also identified operational, resourcing and other practical issues that they felt need to be resolved to enable the proposals to be enacted. Those include funding, the implications for workforce planning, such as staffing arrangements during longer opening hours and holiday periods, and staff training. The strong message from those who responded to the consultation was that we need to maintain the quality of provision. In particular, local authorities pointed out the difficulties of delivering a more flexible service, because that is always more difficult and expensive to manage. Although I have sympathy with the local authorities in meeting those challenges, meet them they must. Parents have waited for far too long for more flexible provision that is of a high quality. That is why the bill is needed and why I welcome the minister’s remarks. I am delighted that the First Minister has said that a transformational shift in childcare should be one of the first tasks of an independent Scotland. The “Government Expenditure and Revenue in Scotland” statistics show that Scotland pays more than it gets back from London, amounting to more than £800 a head for every man, woman and child in the country. I cannot imagine a better way of spending a portion of that £800 than spending it on our youngest children. However, the only way that we will achieve that is through voting for independence next year.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what support Dumfries and Galloway has received from the cashback for communities scheme. (S4O-02057)

Could the cabinet secretary provide us with a breakdown of the amount that has been confiscated from criminals on a yearly basis? Does that show an upward trend from 2007, when the Scottish National Party Government introduced cashback?

Before I start, I draw members’ attention to my entry in the register of members’ interests, in that I write a column for the Daily Record newspaper. My experience in the press goes back a long way. It was my entire career up to my election to the Parliament. I have worked in the local press—I started on the Greenock Telegraph and the Carluke Gazette. I have also worked on The Scotsman, The Herald and The Sunday Times as a reporter, feature writer, columnist and editor. I have genuinely struggled with the topic of press regulation since the beginning of the Leveson inquiry. The cabinet secretary will be pleased to hear that I will support the motion, but I will touch on a few aspects of my experience to show that, sometimes, journalists struggle with difficult ethical dilemmas. We have heard from other members about some of the worst abuses, but sometimes there is a fine dividing line. My experience from newspapers is that there are people who take offence extremely easily. Politicians in particular take offence extremely easily, and they are surpassed only by other journalists. I think that I received more complaints from other journalists than I did from politicians over my career. There are important points to draw out. The editors’ code says that we should be balanced. Of course we think that reporting should be balanced, as Chic Brodie said, but the journalist who inspired me in my early career was John Pilger. He is a brilliant journalist, but many people do not think that he is a balanced one. John Pilger himself has argued with the idea that there is an absolute truth somewhere. He disagrees with that and says that there is a manufactured consensus.

The member makes a fair point. I would condemn any homophobic material, and we should use the laws on hate crime and on fomenting hatred to fight against that sort of thing. I want to raise one issue that came up quite early in my career when I was a feature writer for The Scotsman. It was during the prime ministership of the late Margaret Thatcher, and I did a series of articles on poverty. I felt very pleased with them. I interviewed a lot of people on a particular housing scheme, including teachers from the local school and parents, and I wrote about the effect that intergenerational poverty had on people. One of the strongest pieces, I felt, involved the headteacher from the local school, who talked about the challenges that she, her staff and the children faced. I felt that the series of articles was sympathetic to the scheme and to the experiences of people who were living in poverty, but a number of people on the housing scheme were offended by the series of articles because they did not like the terms “poverty” and “poor” being used in relation to their community. They had a genuine point, but I give that example to show that sometimes, despite the best of intentions, people can take a great deal of offence. We all agree about the need for reform in relation to intrusion into private grief. I do not think that anybody who sat and listened to Mrs Watson giving evidence to the committee last week could have failed to be moved. She has suffered the loss of not one but two children, and we could see that her pain is still raw as a result of the way in which she has been treated in the media. On the general point about intrusion into private grief, I note that journalists sometimes have to work with bereaved families in order to tell a story that then changes policy, just as we as politicians use human narratives to tell stories about why policy needs to be changed. I can illustrate that by drawing on my own experience. At the time of the Dunblane murders, there was a campaign across the media for changes to the gun laws. The Dunblane case is interesting because it probably marked a watershed in that the media respected the parents’ privacy. The media did not intrude into the funerals, for example. That was regarded as a breakthrough. However, journalists had to build up a relationship with some of the bereaved parents and some of the parents whose children were injured in order to tell the story, which then gave extra emotional weight to the campaign to have the law changed. That is a difficult issue, because sometimes journalists can build up a relationship that works well, but they have to make the approach in the first place—that is all that I am saying. Sometimes, journalists do that for the best of reasons. It is important to follow the editors’ code. The reason why I support the motion is because of some of the evidence that was led in committee. I was particularly struck by those who argued that, basically, what we are talking about is the editors’ code as it currently exists. Underpinning that, I was persuaded by the fact that both the NUJ and the professor of investigative journalism Eamonn McCann are sympathetic to regulation because we see ourselves as professionals, and professionals have to uphold certain standards. I was persuaded by them—

I am over my six minutes, so probably not.

I was also persuaded by David Sinclair from Victim Support Scotland. He sat on the McCluskey review and he is a journalist, and in both capacities he felt that the press was not working. For all those reasons, I congratulate the cabinet secretary and indeed the Opposition party leaders on working together to come to a consensus. Sometimes, we need to set our own views aside—

—and say, “What is the right thing to do?” For that reason, I am happy to support the motion.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what can be done to boost employment opportunities in Dumfries and Galloway. (S4O-02018)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that Reid and Taylor, Langholm’s last tweed firm, has gone into administration with the loss of 35 jobs. That comes after a spate of job losses in Langholm this year that will have a devastating effect on a rural community. What assistance can the Scottish Government offer that community and the people who live there?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to protect golden eagles. (S4O-02010)

As the minister acknowledged, there have been a number of shocking incidents across Scotland during the past year. Earlier this month, a golden eagle was shot on the southern upland way. In light of that, will the minister reassure the Parliament that investigations into the illegal killing of eagles are carried out quickly and effectively? Is he willing to update the Parliament on the investigation into the killing of the golden eagle that was found on Deeside in May 2012?

Unlike Ruth Davidson, I grew up in the 60s and 70s, and I do not recognise the picture that she paints of this country as a Dantesque vision of hell. I grew up in a council house—a nice council house with a garden—and I went to a modern, well-equipped school. Then I went to university without having to worry about how I was going to pay for it My father was born in a single end and had to leave school to become a boy labourer at 14. It was not Margaret Thatcher who liberated his daughters to do better than he did; it was the post-war consensus, which was fashioned by Clement Attlee, and the struggles of generations of working people. We in Scotland never took to Thatcherism. The sermon on the Mound that Ms Davidson mentioned earlier was greeted by a stony silence from the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. When Mrs Thatcher had finished lecturing the churchmen about theology, the Moderator of the General Assembly on that occasion handed her two works that the Church of Scotland had done on housing and poverty. He did not have to say anything—everybody knew what it meant. When considering the assertion “there is no such thing as society” it is important to understand what motivated Mrs Thatcher ideologically. The main influence on her thinking was the Austrian economist, Friedrich von Hayek and, in particular, his 1944 book, “The Road to Serfdom”, which she read as an undergraduate at Oxford. According to the Margaret Thatcher Foundation, the central message of “The Road to Serfdom” is “that you cannot compromise with socialism, even in ... social democratic forms, because ... socialism tends always to totalitarian outcomes”. By “socialism”, however, Hayek and Thatcher meant any approach underlined by collective responsibility, social purpose and action. They believed that the politics of consensus would lead to Stalinism.

It is very interesting to hear the member chuckling at that. According to the Margaret Thatcher Foundation, “consensus itself was always a concept that disturbed her”. That sounds completely potty now. Does anyone seriously think that President Obama stepping in to rescue the United States car industry will inevitably lead to the collectivisation of farms in Kansas? That is what Margaret Thatcher and her followers believed.

I do not speak for Jim Sillars. Members: Margo does.

When Mrs Thatcher said that there was no such thing as society, it caused a storm not because it was said out of context, but because it was such a clear articulation of what she had done in office. Her approach to government was described by Professor Stuart Hall, who first coined the term “Thatcherism”, as “authoritarian populism”. She quite deliberately used the forces of the state to destroy the institutions of the post-war consensus, which she considered a threat.

No, I would like to make progress. Margaret Thatcher did not stop at the trade unions. Alex Johnstone rose—

Her politics were designed to reposition the country on the right in order to destroy anything that could be viewed as a vehicle for consensus and social democracy. The Thatcherites set out to destroy large manufacturing concerns and national utilities because labour was organised in those industries. They wished to break areas of potential opposition, whether in English local authorities or in anti-Thatcher Scotland. The main purpose of the poll tax, for example, was to encourage a rightward shift in local authorities. It did not work, but that was the main purpose. This past week, we have been told that the UK in 1979 was the sick man of Europe and that Thatcherism was the shock therapy, but Thatcherism was all shock and no therapy. Interest rates were 12 per cent when Mrs Thatcher took office in 1979, and they rose under her premiership. At one point they reached 17 per cent, which immediately made industry uncompetitive and destroyed huge swathes of our manufacturing base. Countries such as Germany, the United States and Japan all increased their manufacturing production substantially over that period, but it contracted sharply in Britain.

The Office for National Statistics figures are clear that manufacturing accounted for 20 per cent of UK GDP in 1979 but that the figure went down to 9 per cent by the eve of the banking collapse in 2008. In Scotland, Mrs Thatcher opposed devolution for the same reasons that she tried to smash trade unions, the manufacturing industry and local authorities. She thought that Scotland, left to itself, would become socialist. Scotland had to be put back in its box, like the steel and engineering industries and the Greater London Council. She opposed the African National Congress in South Africa for probably the same reason—she believed that black majority rule, too, would lead to socialism. She was wrong in her assumptions about Scotland, but she was correct in her suspicion that a Scottish Parliament would be a bastion of social democratic values, which her followers considered abhorrent.

This is the only place in the UK that has set about dismantling some of Margaret Thatcher’s key policies, most notably the right to buy social housing and the creeping privatisation of the NHS and higher education. However, the only way in which we will be able to roll back for good the damage that she has done is by getting all the powers that we need for this Parliament, and we will get that only through the full powers of independence.

I welcome the recent audit from the Scottish Government and the Scottish funding council, which shows claims of large numbers of students on college waiting lists to be false. Will the minister outline what work is being done to improve and streamline the college application process further?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what it is doing to improve road and rail journey times from Dumfries to Glasgow and Edinburgh. (S4O-01957)

I am aware of the Government’s considerable—indeed, record—investment in the south-west road network, in particular on the A75. However, Dumfries is the south-west capital and it is badly served by slow train services to the central belt and by the A701 road, which is an accident black spot. What more can the Government do to address that situation in the future?

The Post-16 Education (Scotland) Bill has its origins in reports and reviews by Ferdinand von Prondzynski and Russel Griggs. Given the constraints of time and the wide-ranging nature of the bill, I intend to concentrate on Professor von Prondzynski’s review of higher education governance. Professor von Prondzynski’s report on higher education governance drew both support and opposition. It tended to divide people along similar lines to the expressions of support for and criticism of the bill. The professor wanted to rein in the pay of principals and make governance more transparent and open, and he made the point that our universities, many of which date back to the middle ages, have myriad governance arrangements, including a few that were founded by papal bull. Among the eminent people on von Prondzynski’s review panel was the then rector of the University of Edinburgh, Iain MacWhirter, who was, of course, elected by and spoke for the students. Mr MacWhirter said at the time that the proposed reforms were very much in the Scottish tradition of education. He wrote, of the phrase “the democratic intellect”, that “There has been much debate about what George Elder Davies, who coined that phrase in the 1960s, really meant. But Professor Ferdinand von Prondzynski ... has finally discerned its settled meaning. Scotland’s universities should be seen as engines of social and cultural improvement—not just for the benefit of the individual, but for society as a whole.” He went on to say—I fully endorse this—that the democratic intellect “means no tuition fees”. It means not allowing our universities to become finishing schools for the well off. The bill is a continuation of the Government’s commitment to free education, which is enshrined in its proposals to widen access.

I do not know what bill Jenny Marra has been reading, because that is not the case. The University and College Union has welcomed the fact that the cabinet secretary intends that Professor von Prondzynski’s recommendations will be carried forward in the governance of universities. I am not quite sure where Jenny Marra is coming from. Mr Russell told the committee that the von Prondzynski review should be the basis of new governance structures that arise from the bill. I welcome Mr Russell’s stated regret about the lack of student and staff representation on the steering group that is developing the Scottish code of governance and I am pleased that his statements in that regard were welcomed by the University and College Union. It has been suggested by some members that von Prondzynski is in agreement with the Opposition parties, so it is important to go back to what his review says about universities’ governance. In the introduction to his report, he praises the considerable achievements of Scotland’s universities, but he is far from uncritical. He said: “In the recent past ... there have been various issues that have attracted adverse publicity and prompted avoidable disputes, which indicate that there are questions to be addressed. Some of the evidence submitted to this review, speaks of concerns about the extent to which the university community of staff and students is now able to participate in collective self-governance”. He was also extremely critical of the way in which principals are paid. I raised that issue with the chairs of the university courts when they appeared before the committee. They did not seem to see any need to reform the way in which principals are paid, even though some principals are paid far more than the Prime Minister. The commitment to widening access is possibly the most important part of the bill. It has been welcomed by NUS Scotland, which said—as others have mentioned—that current progress means that it would take 40 years to achieve true equality of access. The principle of widening access has also been welcomed by Inclusion Scotland, Capability Scotland, the British Medical Association Scotland, the centre of excellence for looked-after children in Scotland, and by Mark Batho, the chief executive of the Scottish funding council. Some people have questioned the need to legislate for widening access. However, Mr Batho put it very well in oral evidence to the committee when he said: “Setting out that intention in legislation gives extra force to what already exists—namely, the outcome agreements that we are developing at the moment, which are not referred to in statute.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 26 February 2013; c 2036.] Michael Russell has been open-minded in seeking ways to improve the bill, and given that we all claim to support its principles, I urge Opposition parties to enter the spirit of consensus, to preserve Scotland’s democratic intellect and take it into the 21st century.

In 2003 I was working at The Herald newspaper in Glasgow, and one of my regular jobs as deputy editor was to conduct a picture conference in which we chose the best news photographs and placed them on the pages of the paper. During the Iraq war we saw many striking photographs that we could not use because they were just too terrible for publication; they showed the staring eyes of dead children, scattered body parts and dreadful intrusive human anguish. However, sometimes we had to risk offending our readers to let them know the true pity of war. When I saw the heartbreaking photograph of Ali Abbas, aged 12, I knew that it must be seen by as many readers as possible. His house and his parents were destroyed by an American bomb and a neighbour pulled him from the conflagration that followed. Both his arms were blown off and his thin torso was covered with burns, although a metal cradle had protected his body from contact. He was smiling. It is often said that Ali Abbas became the face of the war. Perhaps because of the allies’ guilt and shame, or maybe because of the publicity, he received the best medical treatment, and so survived. He is now a tall and handsome 21-year-old living in England, who last year went back to Iraq to marry his childhood sweetheart. It struck me that his personal story carries a parable of sorts about the war. Ali survived, as did his country. He is reconciled to his situation and holds no bitterness against those who so violently tore apart his body and his family. As Ali is, Iraq today is making the best of things, but that does not mend the damage to individuals like Ali and the hundreds of thousands who were killed, maimed, bereaved and displaced. John Lamont quoted an Iraqi soldier who said that the 2003 invasion was correct. When he was interviewed by ITV last night, Ali Abbas said that despite the hopeful aspects of his personal story, he wishes that the invasion had never taken place. He believes that the war was wrong, as do most people. The Conservative amendment talks of Saddam’s human rights record, which was, indeed, disgraceful, but—as has been made clear—that appalling human rights record was not the reason for the invasion. Saddam was told that if he got rid of his weapons of mass destruction there would be no invasion. The reason for the invasion was the alleged existence of those weapons, which as we all now know was a lie. If human rights really were the reason for the invasion, in the interests of consistency we should have invaded Syria, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Libya as well. Gaddafi and Saddam were both monsters, but one faced shock and awe and the other received a handshake in the desert. Saudi Arabia has one of the worst human rights records in the world—not least against the 50 per cent of its population who happen to be female—but although Tony Blair invaded Iraq, he dropped an investigation by the Serious Fraud Office into a corrupt arms deal involving Saudi Arabia. Amnesty says that in 2009 the Royal Saudi Air Force used “UK-supplied Tornado fighter-bombers in attacks in Yemen which killed hundreds—possibly thousands—of civilians.” Things have not improved under the present UK Government. On a three-day visit to the region last year, David Cameron launched a major push to equip Gulf states with Typhoon fighter jets. However, just last week, the Saudi regime executed seven men, despite protests that were voiced by the EU and the UN because of the belief that their confessions had been extracted under torture. I think that, in 2003, there were people who convinced themselves that human rights justified the invasion and were thinking about the fate of the Kurds and the Shia Muslims in the south of Iraq. However, with hindsight and on reflection, I think that they should admit that the human rights justification for the invasion was inconsistent, inaccurate and immoral. I have not visited Iraq, as some members in the chamber have, so I will conclude by quoting what Human Rights Watch’s “World Report 2013” has to say about human rights in Iraq. It says: “Human rights conditions in Iraq remain poor, particularly for detainees, journalists, activists, and women and girls. Security forces continued to arbitrarily detain and torture detainees, holding some of them outside the custody of the Justice Ministry. The Justice Ministry announced a record number of executions in 2012, but provided little information about the identities of those executed. Iraq security forces continued to respond to peaceful protest with intimidation, threats, violence, and arrests of protesters and journalists. Security forces and pro-government non-state actors harassed journalists and media organizations critical of the government ... Hundreds of civilians and police were killed in spates of violence, including targeted assassinations, amid a political crisis that has dragged on since December 2011.” Two wrongs do not make a right. By resorting to violence, we immediately lose moral authority. That is a point that we should reflect on today.

12. To ask the Scottish Government whether the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth supports investment in large-scale public art projects as a means of generating jobs and boosting economic growth. (S4O-01873)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the star of Caledonia, a world-class landmark that has been designed by Cecil Balmand and Charles Jencks to mark the border between England and Scotland. Does he agree that the star could stimulate sustainable economic growth throughout the nation as an iconic gateway to Scotland, and that it could stimulate the economic growth of Dumfriesshire?

I, too, congratulate Murdo Fraser on securing this important and timely debate in the year of natural Scotland. I thought that it would be useful to use the debate to talk about what is being done positively to help endangered species. I know that many members have joined Scottish Environment LINK’s species champions scheme, which Claire Baker mentioned. That is a great way to highlight the plight of 93 species that are currently facing significant threats. Many members have now adopted a creature and the chamber is full of strange species. I have no doubt that many members hope that the qualities of their chosen animal might reflect on them. Perhaps that is why Rhoda Grant has chosen the golden eagle, Aileen McLeod is the industrious red squirrel and Mary Scanlon is the exquisite freshwater pearl mussel. However, I cannot understand why Murdo Fraser omitted to mention that he is the champion of the natterers bat as well as the wildcat.

That was also a good one to choose. I have more of a challenge on my hands, as I am championing the adder. I was a little bit alarmed when Scottish Environment LINK told me that it thought that I would be the perfect champion of the only venomous snake in Britain—indeed, the only snake at all in Scotland. Apparently, the reptile was unloved among parliamentarians and could not find a champion because, for some reason, politicians did not want to be associated with a poisonous snake. I felt that I had a duty to take up the cudgels on the adder’s behalf and I have no regrets. Like so much of our wildlife, the adder has a huge cultural significance. It features in our language, our literature and our art. It was originally known as the northern viper, which comes from the Latin words “vivus”, meaning alive, and “parere”, meaning giving birth, because of its live bearing habit. It is unusual in that it is a reptile that does not lay eggs. Shakespeare made several references to the adder. In sonnet 112 he said: “In so profound abysm I throw all care Of others’ voices, that my adder’s sense To critic and to flatterer stopped are.” The adder’s sense that Shakespeare refers to means turning a deaf ear. There was a belief that adders could stop their ears to unpleasantness and screen out sounds that did not please them, which is quite a handy attribute for politicians as well. Unfortunately, it is a myth, as adders do not have ears. A lot of our fear and suspicion of adders is based on our misunderstanding of them. No one has died from an adder bite in Britain for more than 20 years. With proper treatment, the worst effects of a bite are nausea and drowsiness, followed by some swelling and unpleasant bruising. The best advice is to leave adders alone. They only tend to attack in extremis, when they are frightened. Adders are relatively common in areas of rough, open countryside and this is the best time of year to see them, when they get ready to mate. In the phenomenon called the dance of the adders, males rise up and writhe and compete against one another for female attention. The south of Scotland—the area that I represent—is an important area for the adder. Currently, the population status of the adder in Scotland is unknown. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that it is in decline because of habitat loss, habitat fragmentation, unsympathetic land management and increased public access, which all put it under pressure. One important way to manage land to favour adders in Scotland is to do with how we manage forestry—once we have a dense canopy of trees with close planting, the snake does not have the sunlight that it needs to thrive. It does much better on the edge of woodlands, where there are young trees, so new planting is important. Adders favour areas with habitat diversity, so their presence usually indicates a healthy ecosystem. They provide food for predatory birds and mammals and they prey on mammals and reptiles. Scotland has no baseline data to indicate the size and distribution of the adder population. Perhaps that is because of the adder’s unpopularity. That lack of data represents a significant barrier to the conservation of the species, so a project to assess the number of adders, where they are and how populous they are, is important. I hope that we have plans to do some counting in the future, as has already taken place in England and Wales.

I commend Jean Urquhart for her speech and suggest that perhaps that eight-year-old could help me with my iPhone as well. I congratulate the Finance Committee on its extensive report and thank it for the opportunity to debate an important issue. Although it is quite right that we face up to the challenges of healthcare costs and pensions, we must also be wary of descending into doom and gloom. I echo what Maureen Watt, Stewart Stevenson, Jean Urquhart and others have said about avoiding speaking in ageist and very negative terms, by using words such as “time bomb”. Older people are not a burden and to depict them as such is to depersonalise them, demean them and ignore their valuable contribution. We need to consider the contribution that older people make through unpaid work, such as in caring, because the number of older carers has grown considerably in recent years. Even in families that do not have particular challenges, older people play a really important role. Like many of my generation, I never knew three of my grandparents, because they died in their 50s, before I was born. Their early deaths were probably linked to their being born into poverty. By contrast, my children had all four of their grandparents for much of their childhood. They broadened their horizons, helped them with their education, got them to numerous extracurricular activities and allowed me to have a career—which I think was a good thing—and to contribute to the overall good. A number of members have mentioned Professor Stiglitz’s evidence last week to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee on alternatives to gross domestic product. One of the striking things that he said was that it is difficult to measure wellbeing, a really important aspect of which is strong and happy families, which we cannot put a price on. Older people are often the linchpin of volunteering in the third sector as well. I want to talk a little bit about an organisation that I visited recently called the Annandale transport initiative, a community transport project based in Lockerbie that provides services for the residents of Annandale and Eskdale and the surrounding villages. It uses specially adapted vehicles and is a fantastic example of an organisation that is contributing to the Scottish Government’s preventative spending agenda. In an area where scheduled bus services are not always accessible and given that 32 per cent of single pensioner households do not have a car, it provides a very valuable service. During my visit, I spoke to two of the organisation’s volunteer directors, Mr Don Hunter-Grant and Mr Robert McDonald, who are both past the age of retirement. Don and Robert had both finished their careers and so, unlike younger people, had the time as well as the skills to dedicate to the cause. It is estimated that around 48 per cent of volunteering in Scotland is undertaken by people who are aged over 50. The main services provided by Annandale transport initiative are delivered by six minibuses for use by registered community groups, a large number of which cater for elderly people, and two community cars. A pool of volunteer drivers and a comprehensive booking service ensure that all the users’ requirements are met. The initiative responds to user demand, such as by providing vehicles for day trips, but it also provides a registered monthly service to Peebles and a twice-monthly service to Carlisle. It is financed by charges and a grant from Dumfries and Galloway Council. The overall budget is over £127,000 a year, but that input will save much more for the public purse. I draw to members’ attention the recent Age Scotland report, “Driving Change: The case for investing in community transport”, which includes invaluable information on why investment in this area is a great example of comprehensive spend. Isolation is a huge issue for older people. Age Scotland reports that 18 per cent of older people do not speak to family or friends on a daily basis. Researchers rate loneliness as a higher risk to health than lifelong smoking. One of the key causes of isolation among older people, particularly in rural areas, is a lack of available transport. Age Scotland has coined the term “transport poverty” which affects a great many people, particularly in rural areas. Two thirds of single pensioner households in Scotland do not have access to a car, as I mentioned earlier. Community transport increases physical activity as one has to walk to the bus, which improves muscle strength, reduces falls and fractures, and helps tackle malnutrition, which can be a problem among older people, by increasing their opportunities to shop around and buy cheaper food. Some members—particularly James Kelly—have criticised aspects of the concessionary travel scheme. However, in a 2009 review of the scheme, 85 per cent of older people and disabled people agreed with the statement that the scheme enhanced access to shopping, health services, leisure facilities and family and friends. Respondents strongly agreed that the scheme had helped them to develop a more active lifestyle. Age Scotland argues that, rather than diminish the scheme, we should extend it to cover community transport initiatives such as Annandale transport initiative. Age Scotland calculates that extending concessionary travel to community transport would save £73 million a year on dealing with hip fractures, because people are more likely to experience fractures and falls on public transport than on specially adapted community transport buses. Age Scotland’s report contains other statistics, such as those on the enormous cost—£1.3 billion—that would be saved on dealing with cardiovascular disease, diabetes and obesity. I understand that we are under extreme pressure in the public finances, given the cuts from London, and that the proposed measure might not be possible in the short term. However, it fits the bill for the Government’s preventative agenda. Before I conclude—

Moving to three-year funding rather than year-to-year funding would make a huge difference to initiatives such as the community transport initiative in Annandale. I would welcome anything that the cabinet secretary had to say in response to that.

Does the cabinet secretary think that the new regionalised model of further education will help courses to be developed that are more in line with local skills and that are more what local businesses want?

14. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with stakeholders regarding college education for people with learning disabilities. (S4O-01842)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of Enable’s employability programme for learning disabled people, which is called transitions to employment and which currently runs in eight college regions? Will he consider offering his support to help Enable to extend the programme to benefit an additional 200 future students in more regions?

Will the member take an intervention?

I think that the member was referring to my article in the Daily Record and I thank him for taking an intervention from me, which Mr Carlaw did not have the guts to do. The article in the Daily Record was well balanced and considered the sensitivities of the issue. The drug that concerned Mr McNeil’s constituent was one for which NICE in England gave consent only after the pharmaceutical company gave a discount, which is not available in Scotland. Does the member agree that there is an issue—

Does the member agree that there is an issue to do with pharmaceutical companies holding the health service to ransom—

Will the member take an intervention?

I thank Jackson Carlaw for taking an intervention. I do not expect him to agree with anything that I write in the Daily Record, but perhaps he would like to reflect on comments that were made by Alan Maynard, who is a professor of health economics at the University of York and the leading authority on health economics in the UK. He has described the cancer drugs fund as allowing the pharmaceutical industry to charge very high prices for drugs whose effectiveness has not been proved.

Alan Maynard described the situation as “‘pork barrel’ politics—bring home the bacon to your supporters in the pharmaceutical industry”.

The University and College Union Scotland said in written evidence to the Education and Culture Committee: “We are concerned that the increase of fees in England gives a perception that Scotland is out of kilter but according to the European Commission, nine other countries do not charge fees including all our Scandinavian neighbours. Further, English fees are the highest in Europe with very few countries charging more than €1000.” So, Scotland and the SNP are in the European mainstream in that area. The SNP’s determination to scrap university fees was well and truly vindicated—

I would like to make progress. I might take an intervention later. In August 2012, figures revealed a 3 per cent rise in Scottish students getting places in Scottish universities. By contrast, admissions to English universities fell by 3 per cent. Ahead of the 2011 Scottish election, the First Minister said that “the rocks would melt with the sun” before he allowed charges for higher education. The SNP went on to win a historic majority after that promise. We have kept that promise, and the First Minister has been as good as his word. Labour made the same promise in the 2011 election, to scrap tuition fees. Given the result of the vote, perhaps the electorate did not have confidence in that promise. As time passes, we see that the electorate were no fools. They did not believe Labour, and they were right not to believe it. Labour has incrementally moved towards a position in which it is once again planning to turn the screw on young people. This week, Anas Sarwar accused—

I advocate a fair system, as they have in Scandinavian countries. We have tried to have that in Scotland. I think that most people understand that we have tried to do as much as we can in Scotland with the powers that we have to put money into the pockets of working people. [Interruption.]

I note that the intervention came just as I was about to bring up Mr Sarwar’s intervention in the debate. Perhaps that is why Mr Henry was anxious to interrupt me. This week, Mr Sarwar accused the SNP of “relentlessly” focusing on free tuition. Let us hope that the SNP remains relentless in its determination not to follow the Tories in England in charging young people up to £9,000 a year for their education. As has been said, that includes many young people in further education colleges in England who are paying an average of £6,200 a year. Therefore, we will not have any crocodile tears from either Labour or the Tories on that issue. The Liberal Democrats famously ditched their election pledge not to raise fees and, as a result, the voters ditched them. If Labour thought that things could not get any worse than they were in 2011, it should remember the fate of the Liberal Democrats that year, and Labour members should look across the chamber at the diminished and bedraggled remnant of what was once a party of Government. Poor, lonely Liam McArthur. Labour should remember that that remnant could be it. We had plenty of evidence of the collusion between Labour and the Tories a long time ago. By September 2011, just months after Labour’s Scottish defeat, Ed Miliband told the Labour Party conference that his party would allow fees in English universities to rise to £6,000 a year. That is less than the Tory and Lib Dems’ £9,000, but is it really doing young people a favour to charge them £6,000 a year for their education?

No. I have already taken an intervention. We are told, of course, that Ed Miliband was talking about England, but we now know from Anas Sarwar that Scottish Labour’s direction of travel is very much to fall into line with England. Gordon Brown tried to soften us up with a speech in August last year—I believe that it was at the Edinburgh book festival—in which he attacked the SNP for scrapping Labour’s fees. Then there was Johann Lamont’s announcement of a cuts commission in which all the advances of devolution are up for grabs, but we will know the result only after 2014. She talked about a something-for-nothing society. She should ask the students who are working extremely hard to gain qualifications, many of whom work part time to pay their living expenses, whether they are getting something for nothing. Where does it stop? Does Labour think that the national health service is an example of something for nothing, too?

In the same month that Johann Lamont gave her something-for-nothing speech, Ed Balls said that Labour would be ruthless with public spending. How ruthless does Labour intend to be with the young people of Scotland? How much does it plan to charge young people for tuition fees in the future? Will it be the £6,000 that Ed Miliband promised, or will Labour go for the £9,000 that its Tory allies in the better together campaign favour? For as long as the SNP is in power, the Scottish students who make up 80 per cent of our university population will have their places guaranteed, and that will be free. That is not cheap. The SNP has invested more than £1 billion this year to protect places for Scottish students, but it is a price worth paying.

Will the member give way?

The member talks about opportunities and how things are going to be paid for. Would the member like to take this opportunity to join the SNP in scrapping the heinous Trident weapons system as a means of funding education in a future independent Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Sorry, cabinet secretary. The first thing that must be said is that we are delivering free education, and the Parliament does not have tax-raising powers, so Hugh Henry has come up with a bit of a red herring. What I said in the debate was that I support a Nordic model of fairness. [Interruption.] I ask Hugh Henry the question that I asked his colleague Mr Neil Bibby. If he is talking about setting priorities, perhaps he will take the opportunity to tell us whether he would put education ahead of spending £100 billion on the renewal of Trident—

Nordic countries are not doing that—

Nordic countries did not spend billions on an illegal war, as the Labour Government did—

I understand that Professor Heckman was talking about quality early years education, but that our colleagues in the south are increasing the ratio of children to carers. Does the member not agree that it is better to have high-quality early years care, and that it is generally understood that the care in Scotland is of a higher quality than that in England and Wales?

Does the minister think that revenue Scotland would be a more efficient tax collector for Scotland than HM Revenue and Customs is? Will he say why?

I draw the minister’s attention to another Dumfriesshire issue, which was raised in the Eskdale & Liddesdale Advertiser this week: the frightening rise in liver fluke cases in livestock due to the recent spate of wet summers. What is being done to address that?

I echo what the minister and my colleagues have said about today’s business in the chamber. Despite what Labour and the other Opposition parties claim, there are not massive waiting lists for college places. No amount of political spin or of calling for apologies from the minister will change that. I was struck by the fact that Mr Henry appeared to backtrack on the previous figures that his party quoted that suggested that there were massive college waiting lists. The minister exposed that through the quotation from the Daily Record, the veracity of which I can vouch for as I am a columnist for it. Mr Henry now says that it is not about numbers. He is shifting the goalposts a bit. He also questions why the audit focused on colleges in west central Scotland, implying that they are somehow more likely to suffer from cross-enrolment or duplication. However, that was not the position of his colleague Drew Smith, who said in questioning the cabinet secretary: “It has been reported in the media that 936 potential students have been turned away from North Glasgow College. Stow College says that it has turned away more than 17,000 potential students in the past three years. Langside College, Anniesland College, the City of Glasgow College and John Wheatley College all say that they could not accommodate requests, and the City of Glasgow College, which the cabinet secretary mentioned in an earlier answer, says that it has had 8,021 applicants on a waiting list in the past year.”—[Official Report, 16 January 2013; c 15508.] We now know from the interim audit that those figures are wildly exaggerated, as the cabinet secretary said. Suggesting that the issue is not about figures but about the concept, as Mr Henry seems to do, is just to divert from the facts. As my colleagues have said, it is completely misleading to suggest that each person who appears on a waiting list is equivalent to one person being turned away. Many successful applicants will appear on lists for other courses simply because they have made more than one application, and some courses will inevitably be more popular than others, which means that applicants will not be guaranteed a place on their first choice of course. That has always been the case, but it does not mean that students will not thrive on alternative courses. Our college reforms will establish a stronger collaboration with employers to ensure that their needs are met and that our young people are trained for the right jobs. That was highlighted recently in my constituency through Skills Development Scotland. The Scottish Government is supporting Scottish Power in Dumfries and Galloway College to develop specialist training provision to meet expected demand for trained linesmen in the area because of the planned upgrade of the national grid. In addition, in November last year, ScottishPower Renewables announced that it will fund courses at Dumfries and Galloway College that will allow students to gain industry-recognised qualifications to help them on their way to become wind turbine technicians. That is what is happening already through our college reforms and we will see more of it in the future. The Scottish Government recognises that colleges are key for employability provision. Right now, colleges are having to adapt and deliver due to a period of considerable change. The Scottish Government has responded positively to calls from the sector for stability, which we can see in the allocation of £19 million of capital funding for further education. I think that that is a very impressive record indeed. A further £17 million has been allocated to colleges, which forms part of our £500 million-plus commitment to colleges that was previously announced in the draft Scottish budget. On top of that, the Scottish Government has allocated £17 million to maintain Scottish student support at record levels and protect the number of students in further education. In addition, the Scottish funding council envisages that the regionalisation reform of the college sector will reduce duplication and deliver savings of more than £500 million per year.

I thank colleagues from across the chamber who intend to speak in the debate. The granting of commercial public sector television licences is a complex matter that is done by the regulator, the Office of Communications, after consultation with the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, Maria Miller. In November last year, Ms Miller announced that she would allow the renewal of channel 3 licences across the UK for another 10 years, subject to negotiation. Ms Miller’s announcement was broadly welcomed by the industry, for understandable reasons. Commercial pressures have been considerable in the past decade, as advertising revenues have declined, and the renewal offers a period of stability. I am pleased that STV, a company that has in recent years exceeded its regulatory requirements for opt-out Scottish programming, will continue to hold the licence for central and northern Scotland. However, none of the programmes that STV makes about Scotland, including the much-acclaimed “Scotland Tonight” is shown in the former Border Television area of the south of Scotland, which takes in around 200,000 people, from Stranraer and Dumfries in the west to the Borders towns in the east. That means that viewers miss out on information about services that are decided in the Scottish Parliament—the things that they really care about, such as health, education and justice. Unless things change, the viewers will have less information than other Scots will have about the referendum in 2014, from both sides of the argument. In addition to that curtailed national dimension, the local news that covers the Scottish side of the border is inadequate. In February 2009, ITV Border and ITV Tyne Tees merged, making 51 of the 64 staff at ITV Border redundant. Operations for ITV Border, including news, moved from Carlisle to Gateshead, and capacity to cover local news and current affairs was reduced. Many of my constituents will say that the news service pre-2009 was far from perfect but, since then, the level of dissatisfaction has increased considerably. The main regional news programmes are ITV Tyne Tees news and “Lookaround”, which airs at 6 pm, with a short bulletin at 10.30 pm each day. Ofcom research that was conducted last year at the request of Ms Miller concluded: “viewers in the south of Scotland were significantly less satisfied than those further north with the coverage of Scottish news, with only 49% responding positively compared to 64% and 74% in central and northern Scotland respectively.” According to Ofcom, viewers in southern Scotland felt that stories from the urban north-east of England and Carlisle dominated the programme, and the location of ITV Tyne Tees in Gateshead was seen as a real problem. A number of constituents have complained to me and offered specific examples. For example, Andrew Simpson of Dumfries told me that the local TV coverage this week of high-speed rail focused on the residents of a place called Church Fenton near York, who were concerned about the value of their houses dropping because of the proximity of the railway. In addition to such individual comments, my motion has received support from organisations such as the Scottish Borders Chamber of Commerce, a spokesman for which told me: “The Chamber’s view is that a simple question needs to be asked. Will we get better coverage of the Borders by being connected to STV or a station with its HQ in the North of England? More coverage can only be good for our local businesses and tourism. So many great things are happening in the Borders just now and we feel that this is not getting the coverage it deserves. Also, the Borders are part of Scotland. It is simply ridiculous that at the time of a referendum on Scottish independence we are not able to receive programmes such as ‘Scotland Tonight’.” Such is the strength of feeling in the Scottish Borders Chamber of Commerce that it intends to hold an event in May on the future of the media in the Borders. If we look at past coverage of Scottish political issues in the regional TV area, the 2012 local elections provide a good illustration of the disparity between coverage in the ITV Tyne Tees and Border region and in the STV region, where a number of special reports were shown. Members will see from the briefing that ITV provided that the offering in Scotland is more popular than other regional channel 3 news programmes. ITV also argues that the Ofcom research that I quoted earlier showed that the greatest demand was for more local news and that few individuals in the focus group that was interviewed spontaneously asked for additional coverage from Scotland. However, there are reasons for that. The south of Scotland is poorly served by the BBC. In the south, the BBC has some excellent journalists, but capacity has been scaled back in recent years. The only place for local news is channel 3, which is why viewers tune in to “Lookaround”, hoping—often in vain—to see something local. It is true that Ofcom’s research also demonstrates a greater demand for local news. However, when they were asked, people said that the choice of Scottish news was inadequate. Industry experts have pointed out to me that the Ofcom questions were framed in such a way that respondents would ask for coverage that they had already lost due to the merger. It is much more difficult to expect people to ask for something that they have never had. You cannot miss what you have not had. There is also a democratic aspect to the debate. At the moment, the BBC is the only provider of national Scottish news and current affairs in the south of Scotland. If the BBC was the only provider of news and current affairs for the whole of the UK, with no Sky or ITN, we would not regard that as satisfactory or democratic. Indeed, one of the reasons why the Jimmy Savile affair damaged the BBC so much was the perception that people were not told the whole story and that the BBC had somehow covered up his crimes and left its commercial rivals to expose him. In its last public service broadcasting review, Ofcom found that 86 per cent of UK viewers thought that plurality of news provision among television channels was really important and 77 per cent assigned a similar value to current affairs. Those findings are reflected in the Scottish research, which was carried out in 2010 for the Scottish Broadcasting Commission and found that three quarters of viewers wanted a choice of providers of Scottish television news. How do we go forward from here? My preference—and I believe the Scottish Government’s preference—is for a single Scottish licence. It is significant that Wales will get a new countrywide licence from 2014 at Maria Miller’s instruction. My earlier quote from the Scottish Borders Chamber of Commerce suggests that it shares my view. However, a single Scottish licence is not possible unless ITV consents, which it has not done. I am pleased that Maria Miller has asked Ofcom to work with ITV to address the poor news offering in the Borders region. However, I am extremely concerned that ITV is in denial about the problem. In a letter to the clerk of the Education and Culture Committee last February, Magnus Brooke, director of regulatory affairs at ITV, insisted that the company was serving viewers in the Borders “highly effectively”. It has now been forced to accept that the Ofcom research shows that that is not the case. However, the ITV briefing to MSPs for this debate seems grudging, as it complains about the cost of provision and suggests that demands for Scottish content are political. There is a long way to go and Ofcom must be forceful on the matter. It must demonstrate that, although it reports to the UK Parliament, it appreciates the distinctive needs of Scotland as a nation and the particular requirements of our rural communities, such as those in the south of Scotland, which will be more expensive to serve, no matter who serves them. There is an easy way forward. ITV could negotiate with STV to take its non-news programming, including “Scotland Tonight”. ITV could provide a local opt-out, which could give in-depth coverage for the south of Scotland. Given the political choices that Scotland faces, I expect Ofcom to be proactive in facilitating an agreement as soon as possible, long before the licence is renewed, for the sake of democracy and choice.

Will the member give way?

As the minister, Derek Mackay, stated, our planning system has a key role to play in supporting economic growth and in contributing to a low-carbon economy. However, it has become clear through the consultation process that barriers still exist within the planning system that hinder, rather than support, those two aims. The plans announced by the Scottish Government through the “Planning Reform—Next Steps” package are to be welcomed. I would like to focus on planning reform from the perspective of renewables, which I am sure most members will have some experience of. Scotland is the windiest country in Europe and has massive green energy potential. The industry is already delivering jobs and securing billions of pounds of investment in our economy and in communities across Scotland. However, when the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee report on the achievability of the Scottish Government’s renewable energy targets was published last November, it became apparent that there are issues arising from the planning system that should be addressed. One of the most pressing concerns is that increasingly high numbers of renewable energy applications are contributing to the pressure on the planning system, particularly in some local authority areas. With that in mind, I welcome the Scottish Government’s announcement that it will provide additional one-off funding of £673,000 to help planning authorities to deal with applications for wind turbines. Those resources have been applauded by many organisations, including the Royal Town Planning Institute Scotland. I reiterate Derek Mackay’s point that the main objectives for the new national planning framework include facilitating the expansion of renewable energy generating capacity, adapting to climate change, facilitating the zero waste agenda, better connectivity and strengthening green infrastructure. The move to a system that promotes confidence and that brings certainty for investors and communities is, alongside the extra money for local authorities, an important step in achieving that. It is probably necessary to add that the objectives do not mean that developers should simply be able to build wind turbines wherever they choose. As part of the move towards a plan-led system, local authorities were required to produce local development plans, including spatial frameworks, to guide developers to the most appropriate locations. Some renewables developers do a good job of meaningfully engaging the community in a cost-effective manner. For example, when I visited the consultation on the Sandy Knowe wind farm near Sanquhar, which is proposed by Burcote Wind, it was clear that the developer has a range of measures in place to ensure meaningful community engagement, such as the creation of a community liaison forum made up of community councillors, local residents and civic organisations. However, such a considered approach is clearly not followed across the board. I hope that the new approach will help to combat that and will give seldom-heard voices a chance to contribute to the planning system. It is important to note the difference between the approach to the planning system in Scotland and the approach south of the border. In England, the approach is top down, but in Scotland we are committed to working collaboratively with stakeholders and to working in partnership with interested parties and communities to achieve an efficient and effective planning system. That is most aptly demonstrated through the planning minister’s announcement in December of £55,000 of funding for two pilot projects to be delivered by Planning Aid for Scotland in the coming months. I welcome the project to investigate a more cost-effective and inclusive approach to delivering the charrette model of community and stakeholder engagement, which involves extending the scope of charrettes by linking land-use planning with community planning and regeneration. The second project aims to improve young people’s involvement in planning. The importance of involving young people in such decisions cannot be overstated. As Planning Aid for Scotland outlined in its briefing for the debate, young people will have to live with the consequences of decisions that are made today, and so they must be brought into the decision-making process. PAS highlighted that one of the most important features for a modernised planning system is better engagement and inclusiveness, and I believe that the new measures will be pivotal in achieving that aim.

I thank the cabinet secretary for referring to the trail in Dumfries and Galloway. I ask for Dumfries and Galloway not to be overlooked in the homecoming celebrations, given Robert the Bruce’s connections as Lord of Annandale and the events at Greyfriars kirk, which began a rebellion all those years ago.

9. To ask the Scottish Government when Creative Scotland will appoint a new chief executive. (S4O-01667)

I do not know whether the cabinet secretary is aware of the letter in The Herald last month from arts practitioners in Dumfries and Galloway who were actually rather positive about the way in which they had been treated by Creative Scotland and who wanted reassurances that the new management of Creative Scotland will continue to look favourably on areas outside the central belt. Those artistic practitioners believe that, under the old Scottish Arts Council, there was a central belt bias in the awarding of funds.

I congratulate the Finance Committee on its report. It is important to remind ourselves, as the STUC reminded the committee, of the simple fact that unemployment is caused by lack of jobs. As the National Union of Students puts it, the UK Government’s austerity policies have been particularly damaging and are responsible for increasing unemployment, and the NUS would like to see the UK mount concerted action to create jobs. I would go further than that, because I believe that the people of Scotland are the best people to make all those decisions and we need the full powers of independence to tackle the scourge of unemployment. There has been a lot of talk about person-centred approaches and it is important to remember that that is exactly what we are doing in Scotland in our education sector, including in our schools, where the child-centred curriculum for excellence prepares our young people for not only employment, but life. I will concentrate on the role of education with regard to employability, which I am sure the whole chamber will agree is crucial. I welcome the budget announcement of an extra £18 million for skills training in 2013-14. That is over and above the existing commitment to modern apprenticeships and opportunities for all. I am delighted that the Scottish Government has doubled the number of modern apprenticeship starts since 2007 and exceeded its own 25,000 target last year, giving starts to 26,427 modern apprentices. However, it is keeping education free for all that we must not take for granted in improving employability for graduates and right across the economy. Our universities are among the best in the world and have a research record far ahead of our population. They are an economic engine as well as an intellectual one, and it is vital that they continue to get the support that they have received from the Scottish Government to date. Free access to higher education means that Scotland is bucking the UK trend. More than 50,000 fewer people across the UK started higher education courses this autumn than did so last year, except in Scotland where university uptake is up, highlighting the benefit of free access. In England, where fees have trebled to £9,000 a year, there has been a drastic 6.6 per cent drop in the number of people taking up university places, whereas in Scotland the number of students has risen by 0.3 per cent. Those figures show that Scotland is delivering far more successful policies and outcomes with the degree of independence that the Scottish Parliament already has. With the full powers of an independent Scotland, we could do the same in all areas that are currently reserved to Westminster, including employability.

No. I want to make progress. A 6.6 per cent drop in student starts shows just how much damage the UK Government’s socially exclusive policy is doing south of the border. In Scotland, student debt levels are the lowest in the UK. Figures from the Student Loans Company show that the average student loan debt was £6,480 in Scotland compared to £17,140 in England, £13,650 in Wales and £15,800 in Northern Ireland. Our success applies not just to universities. I am delighted that the SNP is protecting 26,300 college students from tuition fees. The Conservatives have been critical of the situation in colleges in Scotland, but I ask them to look south of the border where college students are paying up to £9,000 for full-time degree courses. In 2013, the average student at a further education college south of the border will pay an estimated £6,200 according to the Office for Fair Access. I am pleased to see that the budget is investing further in colleges, helping to support students and protect numbers. We are also investing in the college estate. Through our non-profit-distributing programme, there will be £200 million to build a new City of Glasgow College and £100 million for new colleges in Inverness and Kilmarnock. We have also provided substantial capital investment for colleges in Anniesland, Coatbridge, Dundee and Alloa. It is important to remind ourselves that we face unprecedented cuts to our budget in Scotland. Given that fact, the Minister for Youth Employment is to be congratulated on the fall in youth unemployment by 4.3 per cent to 21 per cent in the period from August to October. I am sure that she would be the first to agree that there is no room for complacency, but given the restrictions on the Parliament’s powers over employability, tax, welfare and the economy, any improvement is a considerable achievement.

I thank the cabinet secretary for his statement. Will the Scottish Government continue to look for additional money to fund capital projects?

I, too, congratulate Alison McInnes on securing the debate, and I welcome the members of the Camphill communities who are in the gallery today. There are two Camphill projects in my region, which is South Scotland. One is at Loch Arthur, which my colleague Aileen McLeod will talk about in more detail later. The other is at Pishwanton in East Lothian, to which I intend to devote most of my speech. Pishwanton Wood is a place of learning, but not in the traditional sense. The facility consists of 60 acres of varied plant and animal habitat at the foot of the Lammermuir hills south-east of Edinburgh. It has belonged to the Life Science Trust since 1996, when it was bought as a base for the demonstration of Goethean science and art in action. Ever since then, it has been used as an outdoor classroom, and has gradually developed indoor facilities over the years. The focus on inclusion is apparent in how the land is worked. Pishwanton Wood is not a closed community; people with learning difficulties work alongside students and volunteers from the area in a manner that promotes therapy for the people and the land. The work of the community at Pishwanton not only promotes inclusion and integration of people with learning disabilities, but is important for Scotland’s dedication to a sustainable future. It is a flagship for sustainable environmental practice, with beautiful handcrafted buildings made of natural materials. The team listens to the land in order to care for it and develop it in a way that marries the best of human intention for sustainable ecological action with what the land itself is trying to become. Pishwanton Wood is also a centre of environmental education, research and therapy, which offers opportunities for people of all ages and abilities to renew and deepen their relationship with nature. Using Goethean scientific holistic methodology, people are encouraged to explore ways of integrating biodynamic land management, agriculture, building, horticulture, and woodland management and conservation activities to create a practical demonstration of sustainable land use. It was my great pleasure at the reception at lunchtime today to meet David, who is one of the young men who work at Pishwanton, and to discuss with him the opportunities that the community has given him. David told me that he has been working on a new chalet that is being built for indoor teaching. I saw the foundations that he had been digging and the joinery and tiling work that he has been doing. The building project has given that young man an opportunity to do meaningful work and to develop his skills, particularly in woodwork, with the correct training and in a nurturing environment. One of the first things that I did when I was elected was visit Loch Arthur in Dumfries and Galloway. There, I was struck by the opportunities that people have to develop their skills. People with learning disabilities are as varied as everyone else, but often people with certain learning disabilities can do things that other people, who do not have disabilities, cannot do quite so well. For example, they can do methodical work. I have a learning disabled sister—she has Down’s syndrome—who is much more methodical than I am; she is much more organised and can pay attention to detail. There are many people who, if they were given a supportive environment, without interruptions and distractions, in which they could work to a routine, could perform at a high level in spite of their disability. I congratulate Camphill, and I congratulate Alison McInnes again on securing the debate. I endorse the point that she and Maureen Watt made, which is that Camphill offers an important model that local authorities would do well to pay more attention to.

Before I start, I point out that the David Cameron whom my colleague, Gordon MacDonald, mentioned is in fact a highly respected educational consultant in Scotland. I would hate for Mr Bibby to get into trouble for making an inadvertent error, and I am sure that he will correct the record timeously. [Interruption.]

I want to talk about the amber group of young people that Skills Development Scotland has identified as being in need of additional support from the careers service because of poor academic attainment or attendance. I understand that an estimated 35,000 people will be classified as amber under the new strategy, and I understand that they will receive between six and eight one-to-one meetings per term. I am surprised that Labour in particular has such a negative view of the traffic-light system that targets this group, given that it was the previous Labour Administration that identified this group as a priority. They were identified as NEETs—or young people not in education, employment or training. We do not use that term now but it was understood at the time that there were far too many of them in Scotland. The highest proportion—

No, thanks—I want to make progress. [Interruption.]

Scotland had the highest proportion of these young people in Europe. Such was the concern over these teenagers that the previous Administration under Jack McConnell brought together the Smith group, which comprised our most successful business leaders, to work with Government on a solution. As well as the chairman, Lord Smith of Kelvin, the group included Tom Hunter, Willie Haughey and Jim McColl, who have all put their money where their mouths are to fund various entrepreneurial and innovative educational opportunities. The Smith group has continued to work closely with this SNP Government. It was on its recommendation that the Minister for Youth Employment, the first such appointment in these islands, was created, and we have taken forward many of its ideas about increasing vocational education with our record number of modern apprenticeship starts and our opportunities for all programme for 16 to 19-year-olds. The modernisation of the careers service, with a focus on the young people now identified as amber, was a recommendation of the Smith group from its earliest times. These businessmen did not give up their time and money because everything was hunky-dory. The system, including the delivery of careers advice, was simply not working for a great many of the young people who needed the most help. That was made clear by none other than Jack McConnell himself. In February 2006, a Government press release announcing the establishment of the Smith group said that “Additional careers advice based in schools, targeted on those who need it most” was an essential part of the way in which Governments should move forward. The Smith group itself said: “effective targeting, based on reliable evidence, supports a case for significant levels of investment in those parts of Scotland where the NEET problem is highest. This population of young people is the most likely to become highly dependent on the public sector throughout their adult lives. Early intervention can make a profound difference to their life chances.” Early intervention has been a byword of this Government’s approach to service delivery, and it applies as much to the careers service as it does to other areas of Government policy such as early years education. The approach is already having a positive effect on the problems that the Smith group identified. For example, figures published in June show that 87.2 per cent of pupils who left school in 2010-11 were in positive destinations by March 2012, up from the previous year’s 85.2 per cent and a record high. Of course, we must not forget the majority of our youngsters, who are in the 100,000-strong group classified as green and who will benefit from careers advice throughout the school curriculum through curriculum for excellence, the my world of work website and engagement with professional careers advisers, if that is what they want. I was very encouraged to hear Skills Development Scotland’s Malcolm Barron tell the Education and Culture Committee that there is no single solution for each young person and that careers professionals will work with teachers to deliver careers advice through group sessions and personal and social education classes. As the minister and Skills Development Scotland have repeatedly pointed out, no young person who wants an interview will be denied one. I, too, was concerned about the allegations that young people might be unable to access one-to-one careers advice but I am now absolutely satisfied that that is not the case. A number of people have quoted the Unison survey, which we have still to see. It strikes me that it is not the most extensive survey, although I might revise that view once I have had the opportunity to examine it more closely. However, when I carried out my own survey by calling my own local college—Dumfries and Galloway College—I heard very positive feedback on the website from staff and young people. One young person said: “The website was very helpful. It is easy to understand and sorts everything out with a step by step guideline for you. I would use it again in the future.” Another person said: “I used it loads recently for my strengths and weaknesses. My CV is on there and I will use it in the future for accessing this.” The staff feedback was positive, too. One staff member said: “We do use it a lot and it is great as the students can pick up their CV, cover letter, strengths and weaknesses on the move with any computer.” I want to comment on other feedback on the website and the modernisation of the careers service.

Ken Cunningham CB, the general secretary of School Leaders Scotland, has endorsed the SDS’s approach. He says: “it dovetails with the wide range of support which schools are able to provide through a pupil’s time in school. It recognises the sheer diversity of need and offers a wide range of support targeting specifically those most in need at the appropriate time.”

I am happy to conclude with the words of Ken Cunningham, who endorses the modernisation of the careers service very effectively.

I agree that there is a skills gap in relation to engineering. Dr Peter Hughes, the chief executive of Scottish Engineering, said: “We welcome the proposals with regard to Delivery of Career Management Skills in the classroom and Group based Career Management Skills for all pupils with coaching for pupils deemed to be at risk. We will do whatever we can to assist you”— that is, Skills Development Scotland— “in your endeavours.” Does the member agree with Dr Peter Hughes?

I think that it was quite clear from what I said that those young people were identified as potentially becoming part of that group. That is clearly what it was about and that is why they have been targeted. I think that Kezia Dugdale has made a rather specious point.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with Ofcom regarding the rebranding of commercial radio stations in Scotland and the level of Scotland-specific content that they broadcast. (S4O-01548)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer. My concern is indeed the ownership of Real Radio by Global. As she will be aware, Global already owns what started life in Scotland as Beat 106, which was a distinctive Scottish radio station, but now the only Scottish content that it broadcasts is its drive-time show and breakfast show. Does she agree that Maria Miller was wrong not to refer Global’s bid for Real Radio to the Competition Commission and that Ofcom should be doing more to ensure that Scotland has its own distinctive commercial radio?

Can the cabinet secretary tell me how many students who are studying in further education colleges in Scotland would have to pay fees if they were on similar courses in England, under the coalition Government and under the fee regime that is now favoured by Labour’s cuts commission? [Laughter.]

Many members mentioned the saltire or cross of St Andrew, which has its origins in East Lothian, in the South Scotland region that I represent. As members said, St Andrew is an international patron saint. He is the patron saint of many countries. However, as far as I can see—I stand to be corrected if I have made an inadvertent error—the only sovereign state that has a saltire in its flag is Jamaica. In the spirit of the Labour Party’s internationalist amendment, I will say that it pleases me that we share a saltire with Jamaica. The Jamaican flag is a gold saltire cross in a black and green field—those are the pan-African colours—and was adopted in August 1962, on the first Jamaican independence day. I hope that all members agree that it is highly appropriate that in the week in which we celebrate St Andrew’s day we heard that Usain Bolt, Jamaican superstar athlete and the world’s fastest man, will compete in the Commonwealth games in Glasgow in 2014. I look forward to the saltire of Jamaica flying side by side with the saltire of Scotland during the games, I hope as medals of Scottish gold are distributed. I want to consider Annabel Goldie’s warning that national identity could become introspective as a result of political independence. I ask her to look to Jamaica for inspiration. There is a small island nation, which has strong links to Africa, as reflected in its flag, and to the UK. Before 1962 the country flew the union flag and of course it remains a high-profile member of the Commonwealth. Thousands of Jamaicans have made their home in the UK, particularly in the big English cities, just like the Scots whom Ms Goldie mentioned. Many have joint identities, but that does not make them feel apologetic for being Jamaican. By the same token, thousands of Irish people have made their homes in the UK and can celebrate their cultural identity without feeling that doing so is somehow disloyal or disrespectful to their adoptive home and without feeling that the political sovereignty that complements their national identity makes them introspective or is somehow a threat to anyone.

I accept that Jamaicans—and Irish people—in the UK can vote for the Westminster Parliament. I suspect that that would not change for Scots who live in England after independence.

The member made a fair point. It is worth observing that Jamaica plays cricket as part of the West Indies team but competes in the Olympic games as Jamaica. Given the country’s medal haul this year, I do not imagine that there are plans to change that. I must make progress. I wanted to say a little about more local matters. I said that the saltire has its origins in East Lothian. Way back in 832 AD, a battle was fought near Athelstaneford. According to legend, an army of Picts under the high king of Alba, aided by a contingent of Scots, had a victory over some Angles and Saxons under King Athelstan. I do not know whether it is true, but it is a nice story. More important, apparently a saltire was seen above the battlefield and taken as a portent, which led to the adoption of the St Andrew’s cross as Scotland’s national flag. As a result of that legend, we have celebrations in East Lothian. The saltire festival, for example, is a fantastic event, which has been a massive success for the past three years and has expanded to become a nine-day festival celebrating our music, culture and heritage. This year, celebrations began last Friday with the Haddington pipe band whisky dinner. On Sunday, a service was held in the beautiful old church of Athelstaneford, with hymns and songs about St Andrew and a ceremonial handing over of the flag. After that, we had an amazing week of events, including a race day, a farmers market and educational events. The festival will culminate this Sunday with a Scottish music and literature ceremony, to celebrate the best in music and verse that Scotland and East Lothian have to offer. There will be contributions from Barbara Dickson, North Berwick community choir, Fiona and Kirsty Johnson, Caitlin Bruce, Alan Gay and Colin Will. Those who wish to celebrate St Andrew could do no worse than join the locals in East Lothian for their saltire festival.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to explore the role of liquid air energy storage in developing Scotland’s low-carbon economy. (S4O-01519)

My interest in the matter stems from an approach by a constituent who works with companies that specialise in that technology. My constituent is keen that those companies develop their research in Scotland and that they will, perhaps, relocate here from other parts of the United Kingdom to take advantage of our clean energy. What encouragement will the cabinet secretary offer in that regard?

I want to concentrate on the importance of colleges in preparing young people for jobs and meeting the needs of employers. There are areas of agreement on that. Page 3 of the briefing for the debate from Scotland’s Colleges says: “Scotland’s Colleges welcome the move to regionalisation as set out in ‘Putting Learners at the Centre’ and are committed to working with the Scottish Government to ensure it is delivered successfully.” In the current financial climate, I think that most learners have the same purpose in mind: to equip themselves for the world of work. For that to happen, colleges must provide courses that lead to jobs, and they can do that only if they look at market demand and listen to employers. So let us listen to what employers are saying. One of the most revealing pieces of evidence that was given to the Education and Culture Committee was in the written submission from the Federation of Small Businesses. The FSB, which has 20,000 members in Scotland, reported that, in the past, only 10 per cent of its members were contacted by a college over the space of a year. Almost half of that 10 per cent found the interaction helpful, but let us not kid ourselves: that level of interaction is just not good enough. In her subsequent oral evidence to the Education and Culture Committee, Mary Goodman of the Federation of Small Businesses said that she hoped that college reform would address that problem. She said: “colleges have the potential to meet the needs of local businesses far better than they currently do. There is a lot of good practice out there, but it could be far more widespread.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 2 October 2012; c 1500.]

Ms McIntyre gave evidence to the Education and Culture Committee this year, as she did last year. Obviously, she is entitled to her view. Her robust comments show that college heads are not the intimidated creatures that some Opposition politicians have tried to suggest they are. I want to talk about employers, as it is important that colleges listen to them. The committee had a session with employers, including the Scottish Chambers of Commerce. Amy Dalrymple of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce said: “The issue is not about funding and co-investment as much as it is about rethinking and changing attitudes around business involvement and engagement.” In the same session, James Alexander from the Scottish Council for Development and Industry said that the Scottish Government’s regionalisation programme could help to solve that fundamental problem. He said: “It is ... important for colleges to spend more time engaging further with businesses, particularly local businesses. That might be more likely as a result of regionalisation, as a big regional college might be more able to engage with a broader range of businesses to ensure that the courses that it offers and the skills that it delivers meet the needs of employers in its area so that people going through the college system can get the skills that employers can immediately put to use.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 2 October 2012; c 1510, 1501.] That is what it is all about. If colleges do not talk to business, they will not be able to provide the courses that employers need, and that means letting down their students. We saw that in the past before the current reforms. Some—although not all—competing colleges, which were often geographically close to each other, duplicated popular courses. That meant that the market could not absorb the students once they were qualified, and there were no jobs at the end of their courses.

I know quite a lot about learning disability, because I have a learning disabled sister, and I have constantly asked the cabinet secretary about the subject, both in the committee and through the cross-party group in the Scottish Parliament on learning disability. If the member had attended the cross-party group, he would have heard charities for learning disabled students say that a lot of college provision for such students was not fit for purpose because students were sent to repeat courses over and over again. The issue of learning disability is important because it is individual colleges that make the decisions on that. As a result of representations by the cross-party group to the cabinet secretary, he has said that he will ensure that learning disabled students—indeed, all disabled students—are considered in the colleges’ outcome agreements. That is a positive approach. Neil Findlay cannot just keep repeating accusations all the time. I was at the committee when the issue was discussed there and at the cross-party group when it was discussed there, but he was not. I was making a point about employment. At a time of high youth unemployment, and given that our money from London has been cut by £1.3 billion this year, it is right that we focus on courses for young unemployed people. That is what our opportunities for all commitment for 16 to 19-year-olds is about. That also applies to what we are doing for young people outwith colleges. The number of modern apprenticeships has doubled since the previous Labour-Liberal Democrat Administration, despite the fact that we have a great deal less money. The people on those modern apprenticeships are trained both in colleges and outwith them. Everybody knows that there are financial pressures because of the cut from London. The regionalisation programme is a way of reforming colleges so that they deliver for our young people despite that cut.

I, too, congratulate Claudia Beamish on securing the debate, and echo the sentiments of my colleague Aileen McLeod and those that other members across the chamber have expressed about the importance of all parties demonstrating willingness to work together to resolve the issue. I also thank the cabinet secretary for recognising the importance of Shambellie house to the south-west region by chairing the meeting that has already been mentioned, which brought together elected members and representatives of the management of National Museums Scotland. I note, too, the strongly worded letter that the cabinet secretary sent to the museum’s board of trustees conveying our local concerns. Of course, the cabinet secretary cannot and should not directly intervene in operational decisions. I know that only too well because, when I sat on the committee that scrutinised the recent National Library of Scotland Bill, Opposition members rightly made it clear that they did not want ministers—now or in the distant future—to have any say at all in matters that could be perceived as being even remotely curatorial. That said, I was pleased that the cabinet secretary acknowledged the strength of local feeling at the meeting, and I was pleased to hear her tell the meeting that National Museums Scotland should come up with a better offer for Dumfries and Galloway. I will focus on what that better offer might be. Charles Stewart inherited Shambellie house from his father in 1962. He had, by that time, collected more than 6,000 costume pieces over the course of three decades. Fearing that the large Victorian house would be expensive to maintain and that his treasured collection would be dispersed after his death, Stewart concluded that by offering his house and collection to the then Royal Scottish Museum he could save both. He did that successfully but, as we have heard, in recent years visitor numbers to Shambellie house have not been as high as they could be. Static collections can suffer from declining visitor numbers, and we need to keep changing the offering in our museums and galleries to keep up the public’s interest. We could explore that during the stay of execution that has been suggested, and I make a small suggestion of my own. We already have a famous brand in National Museums Scotland. Following the relaunch of the national museum of Scotland in Edinburgh last summer, a series of interviews throughout Scotland showed that the overall awareness of National Museums Scotland had risen substantially from 59 per cent to 78 per cent of the adult population. It is a great brand, and great brands open satellites. We have seen that in the Bilbao Guggenheim, the Centre Pompidou-Metz, the Tates of Liverpool and St Ives, and the Louvres that are coming to the northern French town of Lens and Abu Dhabi. The Victoria and Albert—the world’s leading museum of art and design—will soon come to Dundee. As other members have said, Shambellie house could be the hub for visiting exhibitions in the region. A satellite would be a nice idea, and that is why I am putting it forward. I am aware that we live in constrained times, but a year’s grace would give us the opportunity to explore all sorts of options. Our national collections are precious and say much about Scotland as a country and a culture, and that story needs to be told in every corner of our nation. National Museums Scotland states that its prime purpose is to hold the national collections that it manages in trust for the people of Scotland in perpetuity and to enable access to them for as large and as broad an audience as possible. Closing the national museum of costume at New Abbey flies in the face of enabling access for as broad an audience as possible. National Museums Scotland claims that it operates on the basis of four main values: being creative by using innovation and thriving on good ideas; being generous; being collaborative; and being forward thinking. I say to it, “Prove it.” National Museums Scotland has had plenty of innovative ideas thrown at it, both tonight and in discussions with local MSPs, Dumfries and Galloway Council, the local chamber of commerce, the Association of Dumfries and Galloway Accommodation Providers and Destination Dumfries and Galloway. I echo the cabinet secretary’s call to send a strong message to National Museums Scotland that it must come up with a better offer for Dumfries and Galloway.

Will the member take an intervention?

Is the member seriously arguing that the large numbers of part-time hobby courses that were being provided in the past, as the cabinet secretary mentioned, are really appropriate for a time of high youth unemployment compared with a focus on young people and giving opportunities for all, which is where the focus now is?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with stakeholders regarding the economic and employment benefits of the national grid upgrade in South Scotland. (S4O-01452)

Those figures are welcome. Can the minister confirm my understanding that it is the growth of Scotland’s renewables sector in the south of Scotland that has made the upgrade necessary?

I also welcome this important debate in Parliament during national adoption week. I commend the minister for her comments that encouraged as many people as possible to rule themselves in as potential adopters. We owe it to the young people who are waiting for a loving home to address some of the myths about adoption. It is worth repeating that being on a low income, unemployed, older or single does not rule someone out as a potential adopter. I was concerned by the minister’s comment that information that the Scottish Government received from local authorities revealed that some authorities are still putting an age cap on potential adopters. Given that so many professional women are having babies naturally from the age of 40 onwards, it seems unfair and illogical to rule out people aged 40 and above as potential adopters. I am pleased that the minister recognises that and plans to take action on the matter. It is worth saying that, although a successful adoption might be the ideal solution for some children, it is important to get the right placement for the child, as the example given by Graeme Pearson illustrates. We cannot rush the process, as that might lead to more damage being done. The interests of the child must be paramount. These are difficult issues. I commend the excellent speech by my colleague Stewart Maxwell, the convener of the Education and Culture Committee, in which he outlined some of the evidence that has already come in for our forthcoming inquiry into the best time to intervene. How do we get the balance right between supporting parents in difficulty and realising early enough that no amount of family support can turn things round for a particular child in a troubled family? We know that, for children who require a placement outside the family, it takes too long to establish permanence. It has already been mentioned that in March last year the Scottish Children’s Reporter Administration published a report on care and permanence planning for looked-after children, which found that for most children it took more than two years from the first involvement of services to adoption or a permanence order. The shortest time for achieving permanence was 12 and a half months and, as has been said a number of times, the longest time was a staggering 10 years and 10 months, which is completely unacceptable, particularly given that all of the 100 children studied for the report were under four years old and that 44 per cent were assessed as being at risk either before or at birth. That is all very worrying, but I am pleased that the minister recognises the concern and is taking forward actions to address the issue. The Scottish Government’s response to the SCRA report was ambitious and robust. As the minister said, the Government established the centre for excellence for looked-after children in Scotland—CELCIS. I welcome the fact that the centre has established a permanence team to look at how decisions can be reached more quickly. I note concerns expressed in the briefing from Barnardo’s that decision making by local authorities is inconsistent and often based on poor information. I hope that the CELCIS work will address that. Barnardo’s also points out that GIRFEC is not being properly and consistently applied by all our local authorities. It is right that the Scottish Government enshrines GIRFEC in law through the children and young people bill. It is also right that the Scottish Government plans to work with local authorities on the use of permanence orders and that it has promoted, and indeed insisted on, the use of the national adoption register more widely as a way forward in the children and young people bill. I welcome the Government’s commitment to promoting the use of foster carers as adopters and as permanent long-term carers. The Education and Culture Committee took evidence from the Fostering Network Scotland during its inquiry into the educational attainment of looked-after children. It is worth noting that the network pointed out that school attendance is almost 20 per cent higher for foster children than it is for looked-after children who remain at home with their parents. It is worth adding that educational attainment is only one good reason to achieve permanence at an early stage. As other members have said, attachment is vital. Establishing a loving bond with a caring adult is vital in ensuring good mental health, happiness and success throughout life. For that reason, I welcome the debate and I particularly welcome the minister’s revelation that CELCIS is conducting a world-leading study into attachment, which is at the centre of the issue that we are discussing.

3. To ask the Scottish Government how universal benefits contribute to its preventative spending agenda. (S4O-01398)

The minister will be aware that at least 73,000 frail elderly people benefit from free personal care. If those people had to be provided with geriatric beds instead of care packages, how much would it cost the public purse?

I congratulate Willie Coffey on securing the debate. It is fitting that our Parliament pays tribute to Neil Armstrong, who was a pioneer in so many respects. As well as being the first human being to set foot on the surface of the moon, he was the first person to be made a freeman of the burgh of Langholm in Dumfriesshire. I am delighted to support the efforts of the townspeople and the Clan Armstrong Trust to conduct their own commemoration of Mr Armstrong’s life and achievements and, in particular, his 1972 visit to the town. I understand that that commemoration will go ahead next year and that it will be a major event. Shortly before his death, Neil Armstrong gave a rare interview to—bizarrely—an Australian website that was linked to a professional accountancy body. It was a great scoop for the journalist concerned. It appears that Mr Armstrong agreed to the interview as a tribute to his father, who had been an auditor. In the interview, Neil Armstrong said that he thought that it was a pity that the cause of space exploration had become a political football and that it was disparaged by those who considered it a waste of time and money. He told the interviewer: “NASA has been one of the most successful public investments in motivating students to do well and achieve all they can achieve. It’s sad that we are turning the program in a direction where it will reduce the amount of motivation and stimulation it provides to young people.” NASA plays a leading role in education in America, where it organises study trips for children of all ages. This year, it celebrated a summer of innovation, which was aimed at stimulating through practical experiment children’s interest in science, technology, engineering and mathematics—STEM—subjects. It is fitting that we in Scotland have taken on board Neil Armstrong’s concerns and that we use space exploration to inspire young people to pursue careers in engineering and technology. For 10 years, our young people have had the opportunity to participate in the Scottish space school, which is a collaboration between NASA and the University of Strathclyde. The space school aims to provide inspiration, increase motivation and raise young people’s aspirations in relation to STEM subjects. Since the space school’s inception in 2002, 1,300 pupils from high schools across Scotland have taken part in it. Of them, 400 have now graduated and are employed in well-paid science and technology jobs. I can testify to the programme’s effectiveness on a personal level. When she was just 16, my eldest daughter won a place on it and spent a life-transforming week at NASA’s base in Houston, Texas with 25 other young Scots. They worked with astronauts and engineers, learned about the latest futuristic technology and came away inspired. Like many young women, my daughter had previously thought about applying for an arts degree, but the trip to Houston changed all that by teaching her that engineering was a creative and exciting occupation. She went on to study mechanical engineering. She is now 23 and is working for a Scottish company that services the oil and gas industry and the renewables industry in the North Sea. This week—tomorrow, in fact—another cohort of young Scots from the Scottish space school will head to NASA’s Johnson Space Center. I will name them. I give my best wishes to Francesca Capaldi, Niall Ferguson, Yola Jones, Susie Little, Stephen Lynas, Kirsty McLachlan, Lewis Miller, Ben McSeveney, Eilidh Oliphant and Zoe Parker. I am sure that we all wish them the very best and hope that they turn out to be our engineers of the future. The Scottish space school’s motto is: “The sky is NOT the limit”. That is highly appropriate not just for our young people, but for our nation. I am sure that Neil Armstrong would have approved of that motto.

What discussions is the minister having with the UK Government about climate change plans, given that many of the powers that would help us to make the most of the challenges and opportunities that are associated with climate change remain reserved?

I draw attention to the register of members’ interests and the information that I am a columnist with the Daily Record. I welcome the opportunity to participate in this debate, because although the decision on televising court proceedings is quite rightly one for the Lord President, Scotland’s most senior judge, it is proper that parliamentarians have the opportunity to contribute their views and experience in that regard. My experience comes from a background in the print media, though I confess that my shorthand was never quite fast enough for me to follow a career as a court reporter. That said, the age of the court reporter passed many decades ago, and that, combined with the decline of the print media generally, is the reason why we are having a debate about trial coverage today. We have heard a lot about modernisation and responding to advances in technology, but equally there is a debate to be had about the decline of traditional media and the effect that that has had on the reporting of court proceedings. How do we fill the gap to keep the public well informed and ensure that justice is seen to be done? Even those newspapers that cover trials today simply do not have the space, or indeed the manpower, accurately to reflect lengthy court proceedings in the level of detail that was common 50 years ago. One will read edited highlights of the day’s action—and “action” is how it is presented. The reporter will have to make a judgment on what he or she considers most newsworthy and construct a narrative around that. As a consequence, the reader may remain ignorant of witness testimony and other evidence that turns out to be critical to the outcome of the case. The dwindling number of local newspapers is also a factor in the debate. High Court trials of national interest will continue to be given space in our national newspapers, but the decline in the local press over the past 50 years means that cases that might be of great interest to a particular community go unreported. Combined with the closure of smaller courts—albeit for perfectly legitimate reasons—that means that the dispensation of justice could be increasingly remote unless we modernise. It seems to me that this decline must be addressed by using electronic technology to deliver the kind of forensic reporting that we once saw in newspapers. That is not to say that every fad can meet this need. In my view, Twitter is an entirely unsuitable vehicle with which to report court proceedings. As has already been said, the pitfalls of trying to express a subtle, nuanced case in 138 characters are well known. Twitter should be used only to direct viewers to a verbatim report of proceedings. However, I believe that it is worth exploring whether there might be a role for accredited bloggers in court, if they are trained in Scots law to the same level as traditional newspaper reporters and subject to the same expectations and restrictions. As others have said already, we have already seen such bloggers in action in high-profile trials, particularly in the work of James Doleman in the Sheridan perjury trial last year. If such accreditation were possible, that might also address the difficulties that have been highlighted, such as members of the public blogging from a trial and presenting it in a highly partisan manner. Obviously, allowing television in court is another suggestion for filling the gap caused by the decline in verbatim reporting. I am not against television cameras in court per se, but I take the point made by Donald Findlay QC and others about witness intimidation. However, the same arguments could have been made 50 years ago to prevent newspapers from covering trials and printing witness names and addresses.

Yes, absolutely—after the trial. I guess that I was talking about people blogging from the court and giving partial reports of what was happening in court that would never appear in any newspaper under the rules that we have at the moment. Personally, I do not think that ratings-driven television channels are the correct vehicle for the coverage of trials. The Channel 4 briefing pointed out that its High Court programmes used small, silent, remotely operated cameras so as not to disturb the proceedings, but at the end of the day television stations will want to show edited highlights and will concentrate on high-profile cases. That is already the pattern in the limited televisation of Scottish court proceedings that we have already seen. In 2008, cameras were allowed into the appeal court for the decisions on Nat Fraser and Luke Mitchell, but those decisions would have received considerable coverage whether or not they were filmed. My concern is for the less high-profile cases up and down the country that do not get coverage. One way to avoid the Hollywoodisation of trials that is causing so much concern might be to take the matter out of the hands of television stations by having an independent court TV service provide a verbatim recording of proceedings in the way that the newspapers of old did. Such a service could be bound by the same rules as the televising of this Parliament and forbid editorialising through the use of camera angles and cut-aways. Having said all that, we could be putting the cart before the horse in looking at television as the only solution to the decline of verbatim reporting.

Thank you. The Scottish Court Service already has stenographers who compile verbatim transcripts of trials, but it is difficult for members of the public to get hold of them without going through a complex application procedure and paying a great deal of money. If the Parliament can provide a timely written report of proceedings, I do not understand why we cannot get the same for our courts.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what support it is giving to egg producers. (S4O-01296)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reply. He will be aware that eggs produced in Scotland are produced to higher welfare standards than those in other parts of the United Kingdom and that we have our own SEO country identifier on each egg. What action can the Scotland take to help promote this fact in supermarkets?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what key events are planned for the 2012-13 winter festivals programme. (S4O-01269)

As the cabinet secretary knows, the year of creative Scotland started with the big Burns supper festival in Dumfries. Burns night is one of the lynchpins of the winter festival programme. Will she do everything that she can to encourage further investment in the big Burns supper in Dumfries so that it is the key Burns event in the winter festivals programme, given that Burns lived so much of his life—and, indeed, died—in Dumfries?

I congratulate Claire Baker on bringing the debate to the chamber, and I welcome my colleague Paul Wheelhouse to his new position. I also congratulate Mike Small on bringing the Fife diet food manifesto to the attention of the Parliament and the wider public. He has made a huge contribution to the debate on sustainable food and wider debates in Scotland in the past few years, and it is good to see him in the public gallery. Unlike many members who have contributed to the debate, I am not from Fife, although I enjoy visiting that corner of our country. However, my thoughts turned to Fife when I was on holiday in Italy this year. The links between the Veneto and the east neuk might not be immediately apparent, but Mike Small sent me his food manifesto before the recess, and travelling around Italy made me think about food culture and national and regional identity, and how those things can serve our health and economic needs. The slow food movement began in Italy and, along with France, it is probably the European country that comes closest to meeting the food manifesto’s aims. As an environmentalist, Mike Small will be pleased to hear that I had a very carbon-efficient holiday in Italy, travelling around by bus and train between Verona in the north and Puglia in the south. In the hundreds of miles that we covered, we did not see a single supermarket. I am sure that there must be some, but in Scotland it sometimes seems that you cannot turn a corner without happening on a megastore, whereas in Italy it is very different. The results were immediately apparent in the presence of independent retailers, and food retailers in particular. Although Italy is facing severe economic challenges at present, its small towns do not suffer from the scourge of empty shops as ours do. Likewise, fast-food outlets are few and far between. The food manifesto’s section on decentralising our food infrastructure points out that while large plant bakeries supply more than 90 per cent of the UK market, craft bakeries supply 90 per cent of bread in Italy. Centralisation in the UK is relevant also to the recent concern around the dairy prices that are being paid to farmers, many of whom are found in the South Scotland region that I represent. Six processors control 93 per cent of UK dairy processing. It is good news that the Scottish Government has given a £100,000 grant to dairy farmers together. I also welcome the fact that, through the climate challenge fund, the Scottish Government has done much to promote food sustainability in local communities, including the Fife diet. In the south of Scotland, another local food initiative, Let’s Live Local, has managed to develop some interesting initiatives thanks to that funding, such as money for allotments, Moffat landshare and a food sharing event at which local growers can advertise their surplus produce. I welcome the food manifesto’s acknowledgement of the role of public procurement in developing a local food economy. I very much look forward to the procurement bill being introduced later this year and the effect that it will have on ensuring that local suppliers to public bodies are considered for health reasons as well as on the basis of cost.

I, too, congratulate Clare Adamson on bringing the debate to the chamber, and I welcome the steelworkers memorial fund committee to the gallery. On the day that Ravenscraig steelworks closed in 1992, I was a young reporter with The Scotsman newspaper, based in the Glasgow office. I was immediately sent to Lanarkshire to write what we in the industry called a colour piece, to reflect the feelings of the community. It was a bit like one of those dreadful moments on television when a reporter is asked to interview someone who has just had a bereavement, and they ask, “How do you feel?” It was not an easy job because, basically, I was asking the people of a community how they felt after suffering what was in effect a collective bereavement. The mood on the ground was not one of shock, surprise or mourning, because the intention to close had been announced months before. The mood was one of resignation and quiet anger, because the closure had been a long time coming. The death of Ravenscraig was slow and torturous—it was not so much death by a thousand cuts as death by a thousand temporary closures. For years, it was clear that Ravenscraig was being set up because it was not part of British Steel’s corporate strategy at the time. The plant was deliberately run down to concoct a fraudulent economic case for closure but, embarrassingly for the company’s bosses, the workers at Ravenscraig just kept breaking records for efficiency. It is good to see Mr Brennan and his colleagues in the public gallery. We should remind ourselves that their campaign back in the 1980s and 1990s might not have saved the plant but they won the moral argument. As a result, Scotland won the moral argument, because the existence of this Parliament is due in no small part to the story of Ravenscraig. We have many memorials in our villages, towns and cities across Scotland. Some are to long forgotten generals; most, I am pleased to say, are to fallen soldiers. The steel industry, too, has its fallen soldiers: men who gave their lives to an industry that was key to this country’s prosperity and to whom future generations owe a great debt. That is why the Scottish steelworkers memorial fund is so appropriate. Scotland’s status as a mature economy rests on the backs of generations of steelworkers who, along with miners, gave the workshop of the world its raw materials. In 1888 alone, the Steel Company of Scotland had 33 open hearth furnaces, a technology that we developed and which revolutionised the industry. Beardmore’s had three furnaces, as did Williams of Wishaw; David Colville and Sons had four; and Mossend had five. Around the same time, 30 plate mills were supplying Scotland’s shipbuilding industry and, indeed, that of Northern Ireland, too. Lanarkshire steel launched the Lusitania, the Queen Mary, the Queen Elizabeth, the Empress of Ireland and the Queen Elizabeth 2. Thanks to our ability to produce plentiful high-quality steel, a third of all the shipbuilding tonnage in the UK was launched from the Clyde. We continue to benefit from that achievement. It is not confined to history, as our contemporary reputation as a nation of engineers dates back to that time because, of course, our engineering excellence grew up on the back of shipbuilding, which grew up on the back of steel. That is the steelworkers’ legacy: a nation that is still benefiting from its reputation for technical expertise and invention. I opened my speech by remembering my visit as a journalist to Ravenscraig on the day of its closure, but that sense of loss and tragedy came home to me again 20 years later when, last year, I visited Steel Engineering in Renfrew. That company recently launched TRESTA—the renewable energy skills training academy—with a £500,000 grant from the Scottish Government. Steel Engineering works with the enormous underwater structures that are used in the offshore renewables industry, such as for marine power and offshore wind. In the next few years, there will be an enormous spike in demand for that steel. I could not help being struck by what a great pity it was that Scotland’s capacity for producing steel had been so recklessly reduced back in the 1990s.

I am heartened to hear of the continuing role of the remaining Scottish steel plants in Lanarkshire in the renewable energy industry, and I am pleased to hear that they have won £20 million-worth of investment from Tata Steel over the past two years. That is the largest investment in 20 years and it has created 60 new jobs in the companies.

Colin Timms, who is the plant manager at Dalzell, has mentioned that the renewables industry is our future. That is a fitting memorial to the workers of past centuries whom we commemorate today.

I am not a member of a committee that has scrutinised the bill and have not had the privilege of listening to witnesses. I intend to confine my comments to evidence that I have gathered myself from the area that I represent from stakeholders who have an interest in urban regeneration. I represent South Scotland. As we know, the problem of empty properties is worse in rural areas. It is nothing short of tragic to see otherwise handsome market towns spoiled by the fronts of abandoned shops that ooze a sense of neglect. I hope that all members agree on that. In Dumfries and Galloway, the number of long-term empty properties has risen from 695 in 2008 to 823 last year. The percentage of long-term empty properties in the region is above the Scottish average. I have gathered the views of officials who work in economic development, regeneration, housing and planning and I have to say that they all welcomed the proposal. Of course, nobody is pretending that the bill will eradicate the blight on its own. Rather, it is viewed by the stakeholders I spoke to as a welcome addition to the regeneration toolbox, which includes other Scottish Government initiatives such as the Shelter-run Scottish empty homes partnership, the small business bonus scheme, which benefits many small shop owners and the town centre regeneration fund. In Dumfries and Galloway, the local authority has already used existing powers to reduce the council tax discount on empty properties and second homes. As a result, it has generated £900,000 a year to invest in affordable housing. The bill increases such powers and is therefore an extension of something that has been proven to work. In terms of town centre regeneration, I am told that improvements such as streetscaping and community involvement are hampered in the area that is being improved if it is marred by empty properties. Without the levers that the bill will provide, the main power that is available to authorities, according to the people I have spoken to, is enforcement. For example, if a number of properties are lying empty and neglected, legal intervention is an option. However, I have been told that that is a costly and time-consuming option, which is why the measures in the bill are being welcomed. The proposal is, of course, designed to incentivise owners to return those properties to positive use. As one senior economic development professional pointed out to me, that might encourage some lateral thinking on the part of landowners, who might have to consider a change of use for their property. For example, a retail unit that is no longer viable may be suitable for community use. The same official also hoped that the change in legislation might encourage rental charges to be lowered, thus incentivising new business start-ups, as Mark McDonald has said. The bill seeks to take into consideration the concerns of local property owners and small business owners who are simply struggling to cope with the recession. The minister has already indicated some of the measures that he plans to implement in that regard, and my colleague, Mr Stewart, has pointed out that only 2 per cent of the members of the FSB have benefited from the empty property relief. However, the stakeholders I spoke to were keen to point out that the biggest issue for them was absentee ownership, where properties are part of a wider investment portfolio. That is a particular issue with larger properties that may once have been rented by retail chains—the former Woolworth’s chain springs to mind. I am told that, often, local authorities find it difficult to have any meaningful dialogue with such faceless owners, other than through property agents. The harsh truth is that those agents are primarily interested in financial return and spend little or no time considering their wider responsibilities to communities in which they have very little stake. Affecting their bottom line is the only way to make them sit up and listen. That is why I welcome the bill.

Will the member give way?

I was interested to hear from Patricia Ferguson that the Labour Party no longer thinks that members of NATO are independent countries. That will come as news to France, Denmark and the UK. The front-bench spokesmen of the Labour and Tory alliance are doing their best with the scripts that they have been given, but—unfortunately for them—the Scottish people have heard all that negative naysaying a million times and are unconvinced by it. The Scottish social attitudes survey showed that 71 per cent of people trust the Scottish Government to act in Scotland’s best interests. That is a 10 per cent increase from 2010. Willie Rennie’s speech was more balanced, but his party has believed in home rule for longer than the SNP has existed. Now that the Liberal Democrats are in power in Westminster, why have they not only abandoned their long-standing commitment to home rule, but any discussion of home rule?

I sat on the Scotland Bill Committee with Willie Rennie and noted how he blocked any opportunities that his party had to advance the Parliament’s powers within devolution.

No. Willie Rennie has already had his say. I am sorry. This year’s legislative programme continues the Government’s ambitious and responsive approach to governing Scotland. The issue of fairness is addressed in the marriage and civil partnership bill, for example, the principles of which have support right across the chamber and across wider society. The legislative programme also responds to public concerns about the state of the economy and the need for jobs. The situation has been exacerbated by the Westminster Government’s disastrous deflationary economic policies. With the powers that we have in the Parliament, the Scottish Government is seeking to make things better here. The procurement reform bill in the legislative programme is a particularly good example of how the Government responds to the concerns of business, trade unions and communities. Public sector procurement represents £9 billion a year, and it is essential that we do everything that we can to ensure that the money is spent well. The bill is ambitious. Anyone with a working knowledge of the subject will say that the constraints that are imposed on public authorities by EU procurement rules are considerable. For example, the EU’s remedies directive, which was implemented into Scots law in 2009, means that a contract can be automatically suspended without the need for an interim interdict if a summons is served. It is clear that a public procuring authority that gets things wrong can pay a high price. When we talk about that, let us remember that the procuring authorities are not just the Scottish Government and local authorities. The definition of a contracting authority is extremely wide, and all sorts of small, arm’s-length organisations are subject to EU procurement rules. Earlier this year, a former head of procurement in Whitehall—Peter Smith—told the BBC about risk aversion in contract decisions. Officials fear criticism for awarding contracts on factors other than cost. He also highlighted confusion about regulation.

It is clear that the Scottish Government is doing everything that it can to help the situation in which the Remploy workers find themselves. The EU rules may be strict, but they allow for factors other than price to be taken into account where appropriate. Therefore, I welcome the fact that the procurement bill will introduce a statutory requirement that public sector bodies include community benefit clauses in all new public sector contracts, and in particular that those in receipt of those contracts publish their commitments on training and apprenticeships. Small and medium-sized enterprises are the backbone of the Scottish economy. It is encouraging that they win three quarters of the contracts that are currently advertised on the public contracts Scotland website, and I look forward to that figure increasing with the legislation. It is right that the Government should support a wide consultation on the living wage resulting from Mr Park’s bill, and I very much hope that a way can be found to pay workers a living wage without breaching EU procurement rules. The procurement bill is an ambitious attempt to use the powers that we have in this Parliament to maximise employment and deliver on the SNP’s commitment to fairness and prosperity. However, only full control of our economy will deliver all of our objectives, and only the restoration of full powers of independence to this Parliament will see our country fulfil its potential. That is what connects the referendum bill to the other bills in this programme, and that is why this programme is truly ambitious for the people of Scotland.

I, too, congratulate Patricia Ferguson on securing the debate. However, I would appreciate some sensible suggestions from the Labour Party on how we can address the unprecedented cuts to Scotland’s budget. Its new best friend, Miss Goldie—

No. I have only just started. I will take an intervention later.

I have just started. I will take an intervention later. As I was saying, we are suffering unprecedented cuts to Scotland’s budget. We know that Annabel Goldie’s party wants to charge higher education students £9,000 a year in fees. Perhaps Labour wants to do that as well—perhaps that is what it means by the phrase “better together”. There is a tough choice. Is that what Labour is asking for? I will take Hugh Henry’s intervention now.

I think that Hugh Henry knows that those are weasel words. He is well aware that a European law is involved. The matter has nothing to do with any decision that the Scottish Government has made. I take exception to Patricia Ferguson’s suggestion in the title of her motion that the Government is undermining creativity. In fact, creativity is thriving as never before under the Government. The emphasis on offering opportunities to young people is particularly tangible. I want to say something about culture before I address the wider issue of colleges. I draw Patricia Ferguson’s attention to the new Scots fund, which will put £50 million into emerging young talent in creativity, enterprise and sport over the next four years. We have also put £10 million into the youth music initiative in order to carry that on this year, and Patricia Ferguson will know that there is a major capital investment of £5 million in the new national youth arts centre in Glasgow. I do not want to go into the detailed operational decisions at the Glasgow colleges because that is not the area that I represent, but I suspect that we are not getting the full picture from Patricia Ferguson. The managements of the colleges recently welcomed the merger of John Wheatley College, North Glasgow College and Stow College. Andy Woolley, chair of the board of management at John Wheatley College, was quoted in The Scotsman as saying: “Our board have endorsed this joint approach to mergers and we are delighted to note similar endorsement from the boards of North Glasgow and Stow Colleges. We at John Wheatley College look forward to working with our partners with a view to creating a new, dynamic college which will deliver a high-quality learning experience for all the communities of north-east Glasgow and beyond.” Regionalisation of colleges is about investing in excellence, and the three colleges that are merging in north Glasgow all have great strengths. Stow College in particular will be well known to many members with an interest in popular culture as a centre of excellence for the creative industries, and I would expect that to continue once the merger is complete. There are approximately 1,000 learners in the faculty of creative industries at the college, and I know from contacts in the music business what a high reputation the sound production courses there have. However, colleges have a responsibility to ensure that they are training young people for jobs that exist, so numbers have to reflect what future opportunities are likely to be in the industry. To do otherwise would be dishonest and unfair to our young people. On colleges more generally, the 2012-13 budget, which the Scottish Parliament passed on 8 February, includes provision for an extra £8 million of funding for colleges and £11.4 million for student support.

By 2014-15, further education spending in Scotland will be about £91 per head of population, compared with about £62 per head of population in England. I draw Miss Goldie’s attention to that. The better-together parties need to come up with real solutions. One would be to give Scotland control of its own budget and all its resources so that the tough decisions that they deplore do not have to be quite so tough.

I am delighted to speak on the life of R B Cunninghame Graham and I congratulate my colleague Rob Gibson on securing the debate. Every article that I have read on Cunninghame Graham, from my time at university onwards, and every event such as this debate, seems to seek to reclaim him from undeserved obscurity. We regularly rediscover him and then forget him just as quickly. There is so much that we should remember: in particular, his campaigning on behalf of Lanarkshire miners, whom he was elected to represent as a Liberal in the 1880s when there were still 300 boys under the age of 12 who laboured in the pits beside adult men and women. In the space of a few weeks in 1887, he spoke at 60 meetings of Scottish miners to publicise the coal mines regulation bill, and all 60 supported his eight-hour day amendment. Unfortunately, he could not secure the support of Parliament. When MPs rejected the eight-hour amendment for the whole of Britain and Ireland, Cunninghame Graham attempted to get an opt-out for Scotland—the purpose of his public meetings in Lanarkshire—but that was voted down too, and, for him, that was a very strong vindication of his lifelong support for home rule, which was tied to his passion for social justice. In 1889, shortly after he entered the House of Commons, he said that the demand for a Scottish Parliament came “from the extreme misery of a certain section of the Scottish population, and they wish to have their own Members under their own hands, in order to extort legislation from them suitable to relieve that misery.” —[Official Report, House of Commons, 9 April 1889; Vol 335, c 97.] Forty years later, he told the Reynolds Illustrated News that he wanted a Scottish Parliament to reduce unemployment, raise wages and nationalise the coal mines—all matters that remain reserved to London. However, he was not always so consistent. He was a colourful, mercurial and uncompromising character. For example, he hated Gladstone, his party leader, and boasted regularly of out-staring him in meetings when the old leader had called him in to give him a dressing down. He also described the Liberal leadership as “timorous, miserable inveterate animals who ... are really Tories at heart.” He campaigned as a pacifist ahead of the outbreak of world war one, and then volunteered to serve at the age of 62 when hostilities began in order to show solidarity with the troops at the front line. However, it was his thrawn individualism that resulted in his being sent to prison for protesting against unemployment in Trafalgar Square, and it was the same rebel spirit that got him ejected from the Commons for the dreadful crime of using the word damn, which was no doubt in response to some injustice. I believe that there are practical and economic reasons for our national amnesia about Cunninghame Graham. The fires of our collective memory need to be fuelled with stories. When we had a vibrant newspaper publishing industry in Scotland, Cunninghame Graham was a household name. I, too, congratulate the Glasgow publisher who has given us Cunninghame Graham’s written works this year. However, the written word has been replaced by film, radio and television as the main means of recording and sharing information and telling stories. There has been one good documentary on Cunninghame Graham—“The Adventures of Don Roberto”, in 2008—but it was shown on BBC 2 Scotland only. Compare that with the time devoted to his contemporaries, men whom he inspired, such as William Morris and George Bernard Shaw, as well as other greats of late Victorian and Edwardian London such as the pre-Raphaelites and the early Bloomsbury set—and think about the amount of celebration and scrutiny that they receive through television, drama, debate and discussion. Modern Scotland must address the absence of such attention to our culture and history if we are to keep it alive, relevant and vibrant. Scottish studies in schools will help, but we need to use the modern media as well through a Scottish digital network that funds production for and about this country and through better means of securing funding for films, which is a point that was made just this week on “Good Morning Scotland” by the “Rob Roy” producer Peter Braun. He has been trying for years to raise money to make a film of James Hogg’s “The Private Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified Sinner”, one of our greatest works of literature. However, its author, like Cunninghame Graham and so many other figures in our history and culture, has been unjustifiably marginalised. The film-maker Ken Loach, whose most recent movie is “The Angels’ Share”, said that we need to tell more stories of Scotland on both radio and TV. R B Cunninghame Graham’s life could inspire dozens of different films and programmes, critical as well as celebratory, but the man who inspired Joseph Conrad’s “Nostromo” and who has museums in his honour in Argentina is condemned to random rediscovery in his own land. That is not acceptable.

2. To ask the Scottish Government when it expects to receive the results of the Scottish Court Service’s review of justice delivery. (S4O-01140)

The Scottish Court Service consultation is considering the best way to deliver justice as opposed to the wider implications of court closures. If the Scottish Court Service recommends the closure of any town courts, can the cabinet secretary reassure me that their wider contribution to the strength of our communities will also be taken into consideration—for example in jobs, the spend of court staff in each town and the contribution of working court buildings to the sense of place, pride and history in communities that are often ancient market and county towns?

12. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made in advancing integrated learning in Dumfries and Galloway. (S4O-01080)

There has indeed been encouraging progress on integrated learning in Dumfries and Galloway. May I add a suggestion? Given that Dumfries and Galloway is Scotland’s learning community, can it be considered for one of the pilot projects in the new modern languages programme?

I congratulate Elaine Murray on securing the debate. I endorse her comments on the need for the A75 to be improved, which is why I congratulate the Government on bringing forward the £25.6 million Dungragit bypass on the A75. I also endorse her comments on the unacceptable loss of life. Loss of life is unacceptable on any part of the Scottish road network. It is quite right that, as well as upgrading the road, we should ensure that drivers are more aware of the importance of safe driving, as Elaine Murray suggests. Elaine Murray acknowledged that the Scottish Government’s capital budget has been cut by 33 per cent by the United Kingdom Government at Westminster. I would hope that she and Labour would support the list of shovel-ready projects, including the Hardgrove to Kinmount section of the A75, that Mr Swinney submitted to the UK Government for funding in January. Although David Cameron, the Prime Minister, indicated that he was willing to take forward some of the spending when he met the First Minister in January, he has not been true to his word. The Scottish National Party Scottish Government has a good record on improving the A75. In fact, we have a much better record than Labour had when it was in office. Figures that I have obtained from Transport Scotland show that Labour, in all its years in office in London and Scotland, when money was plentiful, only managed to complete one project on the road, and that was commissioned before the Scottish Parliament opened in 1999. It was the Glen section improvements, which opened in September 1999. Over the past five years, the SNP Government has devoted £36.7 million to special projects alone, including the Dunragit bypass. The Government has already completed two major projects and it started the Dunragit bypass last month. In the 10 years that Labour spent in office here and at Westminster, it only managed to provide £5.9 million for one major project on the road. That is the one that I mentioned—the Glen section improvements. I do not think that that is a particularly good record.

Before Elaine Murray intervenes, I would like to ask her exactly what pressure she put on the Labour Governments when they were in office, and indeed when she was a minister. The Hardgrove to Kinmount improvements were first identified as necessary as long ago as 1997, in a route action plan study.

I tend to judge by actions rather than by words. The fact is that, in 10 years, the Labour Government only managed to spend £5.9 million on one project to upgrade the road. It was the SNP that completed the preparatory work for the Hardgrove section to be upgraded. We certainly got it to that stage by 2009, bar a few technicalities. Elaine Murray asked why the work did not go ahead; it is no coincidence that 2009 was the year in which the Labour chancellor in London, Alistair Darling, in effect cut Scotland’s budget by £500 million. We need to look creatively at how we can take forward vital projects such as the Hardgrove to Kinmount A75 upgrade. I tend to take a different tack from that taken by Dr Murray. We can complain or we can try to do something and make progress. That is why I wrote to David Cameron to point out that the upgrade is a vital infrastructure project, which is on the Scottish Government’s list of shovel-ready projects and is as much deserving of funding as are projects such as the upgrade of London sewers, which the UK Government has funded. At a time of swingeing budget cuts from London, the SNP Government knows that we must act creatively and collaboratively if we are to achieve what we want. I intend to continue to lobby all parties, including the London Government, the Scottish Government and the local authority, to bring forward the project and make south-west Scotland a better place.

Will the member take an intervention?

I wish to apologise sincerely for my absence from the chamber at health and wellbeing question time this afternoon. I realise that that was not the first time that I have done that, and I understand the gravity of the matter. The fault is entirely mine: I am afraid that I completely lost track of time. I realise that I have no excuse for not being present in the chamber when required. I apologise for showing such disrespect not only to you, Presiding Officer, but to Parliament and to my fellow MSPs. I take this as a salutary lesson, on which I will reflect.

I congratulate Dave Thompson on securing the debate on the centenary of the Dewar report. It has been an educational experience for me, as it has been for the other members who have mentioned researching their speeches. I was unfamiliar with the Dewar report until fairly recently. I have not just learned more about the Highlands and Islands medical service and its role as a model for our NHS; I have also learned something about Scottish film history, because one of the best sources of information about the Dewar report is the 1943 film “Highland Doctor”, which was filmed on the islands of Lewis, Harris and North Uist, and on the mainland at Ullapool, Inverness and Dingwall. It was directed by Kay Mander, who settled in Castle Douglas in Dumfries and Galloway, which is one of the areas of South Scotland that I represent. She was one of the first female film-makers and helped to shape British documentary film-making in the 1930s and 1940s with the dramatised documentary format. The film “Highland Doctor” was used for overtly political reasons—to make the case for the NHS, which was obviously very successful a few years later. It opens with an old Highland doctor, played by Alexander Mackenzie, describing practice in the Highlands before the Dewar report transformed the service. He describes vividly his patients being scattered around the country like threepenny bits in a Christmas pudding. There is footage of doctors travelling along dirt roads in pony traps, signalling to patients on islands using semaphore, and hiring rowing boats to attend emergencies. We can see that the film-makers paid close attention to the evidence that was led in the Dewar report, because the report is now available online. Some of it makes for quite startling reading, as John Finnie said. I will take the liberty of reading out a little bit. Dr Bremner of Sutherland said: “When I go to the west (of Sutherland) the people flock round me. It is difficult to get away.” Dr Leach of Beauly said: “Honest people, if they cannot pay for his services, wont send for a doctor until it is too late.” Dr Maclennan of Thurso said “I might mention that one finds generally that a large proportion of non-attendance exists among children.” The Highlands and Islands medical service put an end to all that and we should constantly remind ourselves of that. I also congratulate the committee that is organising the Dewar centenary. It is worth drawing attention to the fact that many of the members of the committee are rural doctors who are committed to rural healthcare, and many of them are members of the remote and rural health education alliance. As other members have mentioned, although the healthcare landscape in remote areas has improved beyond measure in the past 100 years, some familiar problems remain—for example, recruitment and retention of staff. Some members will have had time to look at the 2010 final report of the remote and rural implementation group that was formed to oversee implementation of the recommendations of the Scottish Government’s “Delivering for Remote and Rural Healthcare” report. It highlights some achievements, including the development of an education and performance management framework to ensure that services in remote community hospitals can be delivered, the establishment of the aerial medical emergency retrieval service, and the establishment of new specialist training programmes in remote and rural general surgery, anaesthesia and general medicine. It concludes that many of the targets that were set by the implementation group have been met, but highlights the work that still needs to be done. There is always work to be done, particularly when budgets are under considerable pressure. However, I have every confidence that today’s rural medical professionals, like those of the Highlands and Islands medical service, will continue to do their utmost to deliver for patients, and that the NHS in Scotland will stay true to the universal principle that was first laid down in the Dewar report.

I am delighted to have been given the opportunity to speak in this debate on the work of our national performing companies. All the companies do sterling work, as members have said, but I will concentrate on the work of the Royal Scottish National Orchestra. I became familiar with the RSNO’s staff and grew to admire its work greatly when I was commissioning arts pieces for newspapers and working closely with the company. I should declare an interest: my daughter sings with the RSNO junior chorus. I pay tribute to Christopher Bell, who directs not just the junior chorus but the National Youth Choir of Scotland and has done incredible work to build Scotland’s reputation as a place for young singers. The RSNO has a long and illustrious history. It was established in 1891 to support the Glasgow choral union, which it outlasted. It became the Scottish National Orchestra in 1950 and gained royal patronage in 1991. World-class conductors such as Sir Alexander Gibson, Walter Susskind and Neeme Järvi helped to make the orchestra one of the finest in Europe, as did several generations of talented musicians. I will concentrate on the current, sparkling company and on developments in recent years, particularly under the creative direction of Stéphane Denève. The RSNO has been remarkably successful in reaching out to new audiences, attracting young people and engaging in educational, therapeutic and community work. It has attracted people who might not otherwise have gone to a classical music concert. That was illustrated for me a few years ago, when I went to a Prokofiev concert in Glasgow royal concert hall. When we entered the foyer bar, ambient electronic music was playing. There were lots of young people around and I realised that I was one of the few audience members who were over 25—well over 25, it has to be said. The Prokofiev in question was conducting the orchestra—he was not the ghost of the famous Russian but his grandson, Gabriel Prokofiev, a London DJ, whom the RSNO had commissioned to perform his composition, “Concerto for Turntables and Orchestra”. He was joined by hip-hop DJ Beni G of the Mixologists, and the programme explored the links between classical and modern dance music. I had not known that such links existed; the evening was an education. We listened to the cutting-edge sound of “Iron Foundry”, a ballet score by Alexander Mosolov, which dates back to 1928. That concert took place several years ago, but innovation is part of the RSNO’s programme every season. Annabel Goldie talked about the naked classics community programme, which has drawn in thousands of people who are not terribly familiar with classical music and want to hear it in a wider context, with explanations, a little bit of history, some multimedia and so on. The approach has worked incredibly well. Last year, 67 per cent of the audience for naked classics were people who were not season-ticket holders or would not normally attend another concert in the season. I think that Annabel Goldie said that she had not tasted naked classics—if I can put it in that way. Next year the company will do Stravinsky’s “The Firebird” and the entire cycle of Wagner’s “Ring”, which I am looking forward to hearing. The cabinet secretary talked about the importance of education and outreach work, and several members talked about the RSNO’s tour of the Shetland Islands. I will talk about the company’s partnership with Rachel House children’s hospice, which provides services for children and young people who have life-limiting conditions. The RSNO visits Rachel House for three days, three times a year, and the same three musicians visit on each occasion. As a result, they build up close relationships with the children and their families and the music therapists and staff at Rachel House. They report that music is a marvellous communication tool, particularly for children whose condition makes communication quite challenging. I know that the musicians get as much out of the experience as the families do. Last August, Rachel House hosted a magic-themed event, which was sponsored by the Miller Group and in which 40 children and young people who attended the hospice were dressed in the style of Harry Potter characters, fairies and pirates. A lot has been said about engagement with young people by our national performing companies, but I am sure that everybody will agree that that is possibly among the most magical uses of the national companies and the arts as a therapeutic tool. We have talked a lot about the importance of reach and of reaching out to different parts of Scotland. One area that I represent is Dumfriesshire, which has this year seen some excellent RSNO performances up close as part of the out and about programme. In March 2011, Dumfries and Galloway Arts Association and Dumfries and Galloway Council held a workshop in which young local people created and recorded the score for a film that they had made themselves and which they later premiered. In addition, two workshops and informal performances were held with patients at Crichton hall in Dumfries, with the guidance of RSNO musicians on how to perform the pieces. I join the cabinet secretary, Ms Ferguson and others in paying tribute in particular to the RSNO’s outgoing musical director, Stéphane Denève. During his tenure, average attendance figures rose year on year, and subscription numbers in Edinburgh and Glasgow are now the highest in a generation. Mr Denève can take great pride in the job that he has done with the RSNO and in his role in reinforcing the auld alliance between Scotland and France. It is heart warming to read about the warmth that he feels for Scotland as displayed on his personal website. He married his wife here and celebrated the birth of his child here. I thank him for his hard work and commitment and for the passion that he has shown for the orchestra and Scotland. I also welcome the new musical director, Peter Oundjian, to his role. I am certain that he can follow on from the recent success that I have outlined.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member take an intervention now?

You expressed your concern about welfare. I think that this Parliament is united—certainly Labour and the SNP are united—in agreement that the welfare changes at Westminster hurt the most vulnerable and poorest in our society. Why is Labour therefore not supporting the Scotland Bill Committee’s recommendation that welfare be devolved to this Parliament?

As a member of the Scotland Bill Committee, I, too, congratulate Linda Fabiani on her convenership and on the good humour with which business was conducted by all the participants across all the political parties. Scrutiny of the bill did not receive a lot of media attention, which perhaps tells us everything that we need to know about it. An aspect that was completely ignored was the original proposal—now happily abandoned—to re-reserve the regulation of certain health professionals. That little-known clause may be more significant than we think, for the bill—as amended after discussions between the UK Government and the Scottish Government—now passes the test set by the doctors of ancient Greece. The Hippocratic oath was, “I will do no harm.” As it stood before the adjustments, the bill was harmful. However, as Mark Griffin has reasonably said, it offered some advances. The capital borrowing powers, although they do not go far enough, are welcome. The bill also provides a framework, however flawed and however short of what we might wish for, for collecting some income tax. Belatedly, the bill also recognises something that everyone in Scotland recognised a long time ago—that we have a Government and not an Executive. However, until the recent agreement between the UK Government and the Scottish Government, the bill was harmful and did not pass the Hippocratic oath test. In particular, the re-reservation of powers was insulting to the Scottish Parliament. One aspect that did not get a great deal of attention was the proposal to partially suspend acts of the Scottish Parliament so that they could be challenged in the Supreme Court. One act of the Scottish Parliament that was challenged in the Supreme Court was our legislation on compensation for the victims of asbestos, and I am glad to say that the Supreme Court upheld the Scottish Parliament’s position on that. If partial suspension had been allowed, that kind of challenge would have been more frequent and common. As Professor Tierney of the University of Edinburgh said when he was advising the committee, the idea of partial suspension was extremely disrespectful to the Parliament. I am pleased that it has been abandoned as a result of the negotiations between the two Governments. Re-reservation of powers also included a clause that would have allowed international agreements to be made in devolved areas between the UK Government and other Governments, and that would ride roughshod over Scottish ministers. I am pleased to see that that proposal has also been abandoned. However, the area that could have caused most harm was in the financial powers on which Calman focused, particularly the method by which the block grant would have been cut; that has already been outlined in the debate. Professor Gerard Holtham pointed out in written and oral evidence to committees of both Parliaments that the proposals under Calman were detrimental to Scotland. His arguments were conducted from a unionist point of view. In his submission, he said about the settlement and the proposals to cut the block grant: “The integrity of the Union might be questioned if there were a persistent and growing divergence between the resources available for public services in one area of the Union and those in others.” Now, unlike Professor Holtham, I do not stay awake at night worrying about the integrity of the union, but I do worry about what is good for Scotland and Scotland’s wellbeing. Throughout the committee’s scrutiny of the bill, there was an insistence that all would come good in the end, that it would be all right on the night, and that this Parliament should agree to an LCM while not knowing how its future finances would be arranged and on the basis of proposals that had never been subjected to an economic analysis to see how they would affect the country’s economy. So I am very pleased that Professor Holtham’s solution has been taken on board. Although I do not think that it goes far enough, it is at least not harmful.

The paper submitted by the Scottish Government proposed a modest cut in corporation tax and showed that it would create a considerable number of jobs over a period of time. If we look around the world, we can see that there are different ways of looking at the issue; we do not have to look at it in crude terms. [Interruption.] Could I have some silence please?

The committee discussed the particular areas and industries that would benefit from a cut in corporation tax. The video games and other digital industries in Canada have really flourished at the expense of our games industry. There are lots of examples from all round the world; otherwise, why would corporation tax be an issue at all? The anti-independence parties have been gloating a lot today and saying that we should be eating humble pie. However, the reality of devolution is that the sovereignty of the Scottish people is denied. Last year, the Scottish people made their aspirations very clear and the gloating from the anti-independence parties because those aspirations have been refused by the London Government shows them up. It would have been better for Scotland if the bill had been toughened up and the six demands, which were based on issues that had received cross-party consensus, had been agreed. The bill would then have benefited Scotland, and it would have benefited the anti-independence parties because they would have had something better to sell going into the referendum.

As it is, they have nothing to sell. They will be the ones who are eating humble pie so they had better get used to the taste.

I want to talk specifically about the way the budget will affect one part of the South Scotland region that I represent. Dumfries and Galloway has a significantly higher proportion of older people than the rest of the country: 30 per cent of its population is older people, compared to 23 per cent for Scotland, which represents 45,000 older people in the region. They are not the rich, three-holidays-a-year pensioners of modern mythology. Those who will be affected by the age-related allowance freeze have incomes ranging from £10,000 to £26,000. According to Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs, 4.4 million such pensioners across the UK will lose an average of £83 as a result of the freeze, which might not sound like much, but to people who are living on a fixed income, it is considerable. It is also the most modest estimate of the average cost of the freeze; many people will pay a great deal more. In my region, pensioners are likely to have to travel further than others and to pay higher fuel costs. They face much higher fuel prices than people anywhere else in the country. The average cost of unleaded petrol in the UK is £1.38 per litre, but in Kirkcudbright this month it is £1.48 a litre. The cabinet secretary talked about an absence of fairness and growth in the budget. The unfair cut to the incomes of 45,000 older people in Dumfries and Galloway will not only damage those individuals—it will also damage local economic growth. The Institute of Fiscal Studies calculations that others have mentioned show that each pensioner will lose an average of £83 a year, which amounts to £3.7 million for those 45,000 older people in Dumfries and Galloway. This large rural region, with lower average wages and higher fuel prices than the rest of the country, cannot afford to lose £3.7 million from its economy. Of course, we are told that there are compensations for the freeze in age-related allowances. The cut in the top rate of income tax will deliver £1 billion to the very rich across the UK, with each person who earns above £150,000 standing to gain a tax bonus of £10,000 a year. Very few such people live in Dumfries and Galloway, but it is a well-established fact that money that is given to those on lower incomes is much more likely to be spent in the local economy, which stimulates it, than is money that is given to the very wealthy, who are more likely to invest in property, for example. I suggest that the £3.7 million that has been taken from the local economy through freezing of allowances will not be compensated for by rich people splashing their extra cash in the streets of Kirkconnel or Sanquhar.

As I said, any increase in the pension will be wiped out by the effects of the Government’s actions on, for example, VAT. It is the Scottish Government, through its freezing of council tax, that is putting more money into the pockets of pensioners and other low-paid people. There is one significant thing that the UK Government was asked to do in Dumfries and Galloway that could have delivered growth. In the budget, George Osborne was asked to release the funds that are needed to upgrade the Hardgrove to Kinmount section of the A75, which is the main east-west link in the region. I was pleased that the upgrade was included in the list of shovel-ready projects that the Scottish Government presented to the Prime Minister after he indicated that he would consider capital investment in Scotland that was ready to go, so it was extremely disappointing that it was not mentioned in the budget, and nor were any of the other shovel-ready projects. If those projects had gone ahead, they would have injected £300 million into the Scottish economy and created thousands of jobs. The A75 upgrade would have injected £10 million into the local economy and would have saved lives: there have been several accidents on that road, in which lives have been lost. The fact that the Prime Minister raised expectations only to dash hopes illustrates once again why Scotland must have control of its own taxation and spending, so I look forward to the day when the budget that is presented to Parliament by Mr Swinney is the only one that we need to debate.

Will Kezia Dugdale give way?

I am pleased that the Labour Party motion acknowledges the need to extend early years education. The SNP does, too, which is why we are committed to delivering the best childcare package in these islands. The 600-hour commitment for all three and four-year-olds and looked-after two-year-olds is just the latest milestone in a process of real improvement under the SNP Government. The pledge builds on achievements since 2007—as Jamie Hepburn just outlined—when the SNP Government moved to increase free provision by 20 per cent. That is 20 per cent more than the previous Liberal and Labour Administration in Scotland, which could manage only 400 hours, despite having considerably more financial breathing space than the Government does at present.

The reason why we are moving to legislate—to which the Labour Party seems to object—is that we are committed to delivering. If Neil Bibby really is concerned about delivery, he should support us in legislating for those 600 hours. Our approach is about more than simply increasing the hours of provision, although that is vital to working parents. It is part of a strategy that has been developed with some of the leading experts in the field, and which dates back to the early years framework in 2008, which set out 10 elements of transformational change. One of those elements—and, I would argue, the most important—involves using early intervention to break the cycle of poverty and inequality for our young people. I am very proud that the Government has taken an inclusive approach to such a vital issue by inviting respected individuals such as Malcolm Chisholm and Professor Susan Deacon to help us to find the best solutions together. We must use all the talents to meet the challenge. Professor Deacon’s report, “Joining the dots: A better start for Scotland’s children”, was clear that the time for talking is over and it is now time for delivery. I was encouraged that the Government responded immediately to that report with a £6.8 million investment in an action fund that will support the third sector to deliver the services that parents and children need. The issue of childcare provision is all about delivery and flexibility. We can promise all the hours we want, but that counts for nothing if the care that we offer is not flexible enough to cater for the real needs of real families. If we are serious about delivering flexible childcare and early years learning, we need legislation. I agree that “The Scottish Childcare Lottery” demonstrated some shocking gaps and deficiencies in provision in Scotland. That is why the First Minister’s response was so firm and focused: within 10 days of the report’s publication, he promised to legislate for 600 hours a year. Only legislation will provide the assurance that the serious gaps that were highlighted in the report will be closed. We need legislation to ensure access to quality childcare all year round, as the minister said, and not just in the school term. We need it to help specific groups such as parents in rural areas, those who work shifts and those who care for other relatives. We need legislation in the children’s bill to ensure that the needs of every child, however complex, are properly addressed. The issue is too important for us to cross our fingers and hope for the best. We cannot afford not to deliver, and we must deliver in such a way as to ensure that provision is tailored to individuals and families. I said that I wanted to consider the issue in a wider context, because it is complex and challenging. It requires creative solutions such as the public-social partnerships that the minister has outlined. Such partnerships meet the challenge of delivery and allow the Government to work with its partners to meet specific needs. It is about more than totting up hours; it is about changing the landscape. We are changing Scotland’s early years landscape and moulding our country into a child-friendly and family-friendly shape, but let us not underestimate the challenge. It requires commitment, co-operation and a change in the law to make it happen.

I share the cabinet secretary’s anger at the report and, in particular, the exposure of a scandalous and unacceptable management culture. Given that the chair is accountable to ministers for the good governance of the board, after this audit does the cabinet secretary still have confidence in the chair of NHS Lothian?

20. To ask the Scottish Executive what independence and control over oil revenue would mean for household income in Scotland, given the latest “Government Expenditure and Revenue Scotland 2010-11” (GERS) statistics. (S4O-00818)

Perhaps the cabinet secretary can explain to members why it is statistically more appropriate, and good practice, to allocate oil revenues on the basis of geography, rather than on a per capita basis, as some of our unionist colleagues insist on doing.

I am delighted to speak in this debate on the future of tourism in Scotland. I say to Siobhan McMahon that I have family in Coatbridge. She reminded me that I used to visit Summerlee regularly when my children were younger. Having listened to her speech, I will definitely pay it another visit. It is a fine visitor attraction. Industrial heritage has huge tourism potential. The tourism sector is critical to the future of our country and it is imperative that we give it all the support that we can. According to the Scottish Tourism Alliance, the sector is worth more than £4.2 billion to our economy, which is equivalent to £850 for every person living in Scotland. There have been a variety of estimates today of the number of people who are employed in the industry. Those have ranged from 215,000 to 220,000, although Deloitte estimates the figure as being even higher at 270,000. The figure of between 215,000 and 220,000 represents about 8 per cent of the total number of people in work and it is more than twice as many people as work in our financial services industry. As members will be aware, long-term tourism trends in Scotland are encouraging and we are working towards global growth targets of achieving a 50 per cent real terms increase by 2015. That target was set in 2006 and since then we, like other countries, have been caught in a severe worldwide depression. There is concern that, because of that, the target may no longer be achievable, although there are plenty of encouraging signs in terms of numbers and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth believes that we should strive to meet the challenge that the target presents. I agree with him. There is cause to be optimistic. Although there is still room for improvement on matters such as staffing, wages and getting the right transport and communications infrastructure in place, in other areas we are playing to pronounced strengths. We are blessed with unsurpassed natural tourism resources: the beauty and diversity of our landscapes, our unique historical and cultural heritage and the warmth and hospitality of our people. Beyond those strengths, there are improved relationships between the public and private sectors and some imaginative industry training programmes. We can capitalise on some tremendous event-driven opportunities: our year of creative Scotland this year; natural Scotland next year; the Commonwealth games; the Ryder cup; and homecoming Scotland. We must continue to be innovative and to seek out and exploit every opportunity for developing our tourism base. I am lucky enough to represent South Scotland, which is one of the most diverse, attractive and welcoming parts of our country. I like to describe it as the beautiful south. The rich heritage and gentle landscapes of Dumfriesshire, the rolling hills and seascapes of East Lothian, the great abbeys and houses of the Borders and the hills and coastal villages of Galloway all have their distinct magic. Beyond those natural assets, there is huge potential for themed tourism. I am delighted that so many talented people in the region have seen its potential and are working extremely hard to develop compelling propositions, which will further increase the tourist footprint. In January, the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs launched the year of creative Scotland in Dumfries. At the same time a new festival, Dumfries’s big Burns supper, took place. More than 2,000 performers—many of them local young people—celebrated our national bard’s life and heritage. I am confident that the festival will continue to grow in the years ahead and become a major event for tourists, particularly those travelling up from England, for whom Dumfries will be the first port of call on a Burns heritage tourism trail. Other arts-based initiatives in the area will help to boost tourism spending. For example, the Stove, newly opened on Dumfries High Street, is set to become an exciting and imaginative cultural venue. Spring fling, which I was privileged to open last week, is the biggest open studio event for artists in Scotland. It celebrates its 10th birthday this year and there is a taster event at the Gracefield arts centre in Dumfries, where people can pick up original artwork at a bargain price. Such examples highlight how important cultural tourism is throughout Scotland and it is fantastic that that premier cultural tourism event takes place in South Scotland. Elsewhere, a new world rugby centre will open in Hawick and astronomers can enjoy Galloway forest park’s benefits as the first dark sky park in the United Kingdom. We face strong global competition in tourism and hospitality. We must ensure that our offering is as strong and inviting as it can be. That means building on our strengths, being as innovative as we can be and ensuring that at every level we provide value for money. I hope that the enthusiasm and innovation seen in South Scotland and elsewhere help to inspire others across the country and that we can build and grow a national tourism industry that encourages millions to enjoy our unique assets and history. I am sure that we will succeed.

I, too, congratulate Sandra White on securing the debate. I support her comments about and praise for the work of BBC staff in Scotland. I will look at the subject in a wider historical context. Sandra White comprehensively outlined the effect on staff and the percentage cuts that are affecting us now. If Scotland had been generously treated when it came to slicing up the broadcasting cake, there might be a justification for prudent housekeeping now, but the opposite is the case. Scotland generates 8.8 per cent of BBC income in licence fees but receives only 5.7 per cent of the revenues that are raised. The BBC’s Scotland-only budget is £102 million per annum, and it will be reduced to £86 million per annum by 2017. That is part of a worrying historical trend that is damaging to our national life, democratic participation and cultural development. The BBC’s Audience Council Scotland reported last year that the BBC should show more, not less, Scottish news and offer deeper analysis in its coverage. The Audience Council Scotland report said that there was a continued bias towards news stories on the network that affect only England. That is striking even to those from outside Scotland. It was put rather well by the respected “Channel Four News” journalist Krishnan Guru-Murthy in his blog last year. He wrote: “I’d forgotten how English the British media is. The inevitable concentration in TV news programmes is on English concerns, English politics, English culture. Having spent just a couple of weeks north of the border it seems blindingly obvious that the status quo doesn’t make sense anymore.” Far from cutting posts in news and current affairs in Scotland, the BBC should be expanding them. As others from across the political parties have said, just as our nation enters a period of intense debate about its future, the media spaces in which we can conduct that debate are shrinking. Why is BBC Radio Scotland’s most analytical and intelligent current affairs show, “Newsweek Scotland”, facing the axe? Why is the only Scottish opt-out on Radio 1, “Introducing in Scotland”, which showcases unsigned bands, being pulled and re-presented as a UK-wide programme from London? Why are programmes that have become part of the aural fabric of Scotland, such as the Janice Forsyth show, being unceremoniously dumped despite audience protests? Janice Forsyth has been described as a national treasure. Can we imagine Radio 4 dumping what it considers to be national treasures, such as “Just a Minute” or “The Archers”? On the same tack, can we imagine it dumping “From Our Own Correspondent”, which could be compared to “Newsweek Scotland”? Of course, Radio 4’s budget is not being cut, because Mark Thompson has described it as the jewel in the crown of the BBC. Its budget of about £100 million a year is being protected. To put that in context, it is more than the whole of BBC Scotland’s broadcasting budget for our country after the cuts. Sandra White referred to Iain MacWhirter’s comments at the Education and Culture Committee. I was chatting to a journalist who also has experience of working for the BBC in both Scotland and London, on “Good Morning Scotland” and “Today”. He mentioned that more money is spent on flowers for the “Today” green room than the entire GMS budget. I have no means of knowing whether that story is apocryphal or accurate, but I do know that the BBC has never made available figures that would allow us to compare those and similar programmes. Such an exercise is called benchmarking, and if it was conducted in a transparent way, it would be clear just how unbalanced is the BBC commitment to delivering quality. I thank Sandra White for her remarks on my cross-examination of Mr Boothman at the Education and Culture Committee. I should add that I put the same question to Mr Boothman’s boss, Mr MacQuarrie, when he was before the Scotland Bill Committee. I asked him whether he had argued against the cuts because Scotland was a special case, and he was unable to answer, too. I reflect on the title “Delivering Quality First”. It is clear that Scotland is not first in line when it comes to quality treatment.

I, too, congratulate Iain Gray on highlighting this issue, which is important to many of the local communities that are in the South Scotland region that I represent. The leaked document outlines options and I understand that the Scottish Court Service has made no decision. It is also important to emphasise that the SCS and its Lord President are, quite properly, independent of the Scottish Government. I have no doubt that their suggested changes will, in their view, be best for the future of the Scottish justice system.

The cabinet secretary did indeed say that it will be a decision for ministers, and the document makes that clear. The recommendations, however, will be made by the SCS and there will be extensive consultation. The proposals are influenced not only by the desire to influence the future of Scottish justice, but by the need to save money in the face of unprecedented cuts to Scotland’s budget by the United Kingdom coalition Government. I urge anyone with worries and strong feelings about the proposals to respond to the consultation when the time comes. Nothing is set in stone. The “Future Court Structures” document makes it clear that the way in which we deliver justice needs to change. Indeed, it is changing and, I am glad to say, improving, partly because the number of cases disposed of in court is falling and partly because crime itself is at a 35-year low, so fewer cases are going to court. We now deliver justice more efficiently—the delays and adjournments that are so frustrating to the system’s users are gradually being reduced. As Christine Grahame has said, the document makes valid points about the suitability of certain buildings to serve the needs of those who use them. It is of particular concern that some courts do not have space to separate witnesses properly from a defendant’s family. Moreover, as the Justice Committee has heard, many of the buildings are expensive to maintain. Notwithstanding the need to serve the interests of justice itself, I agree with Iain Gray that we must look at the function of a local court in the context of its role in the wider community. For example, we should consider the distinct identities of our town centres and how they maintain the civic pride of the communities they serve. Often, courts are in former county towns, such as Haddington, Kirkcudbright and Lanark, which in the past were home to many institutions that have long since been centralised in larger urban centres. The maintenance of courts, which are often architecturally significant buildings, adds immensely to a sense of place and continuity. I disagree with Iain Gray’s suggestion that the Government has ignored the needs of town centres. Only this week, Fiona Hyslop, the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs, announced a fifth round of conservation area regeneration schemes. The Scottish Government is investing another £10 million in protecting and preserving the historic environment of Scotland, to strengthen the vibrancy and strong sense of identity of our town centres. The built environment is a hugely important aspect of that, especially buildings that continue to serve the purpose for which they were created. That is why we need to pause and reflect on the social and, indeed, psychological impact that closing a court would have on a town. We would still have the building but, in effect, it would be a museum. We would also lose some of the liveliness and bustle that the court brings, the staff spending money in local businesses and the local newspaper reporter making his living on the press benches. I join Iain Gray in congratulating the East Lothian Courier on its campaign for Haddington sheriff court, the closure of which—I emphasise that that is only an option in a leaked paper—would end more than 500 years of administration of justice in the county. Locals are rightly proud of that history. Their identity is grounded in both the buildings and the process that takes place in them. I understand the economic context that requires savings to be found in the justice budget as a result of the £1.3 billion-worth of cuts coming from the coalition to Scotland this year alone.

Savings must be made—of that I am sure—but our town centres must be allowed to thrive and justice should be as local as possible.

I, too, congratulate George Adam on securing the debate. I am delighted to join him and other members in supporting the motion and welcoming the take a step in 2012 campaign, which is launching Fairtrade fortnight. I am delighted, too, that our Scottish National Party Government is supporting Fairtrade fortnight. I extend a warm welcome to the visitors from Ghana, Nicaragua, Uganda, Palestine, India, Malawi and Kenya who are visiting Scotland for the fortnight. As others have said, it is surely only a matter of time before Scotland will cement our solidarity with those countries by achieving the status of Fairtrade nation. In my own South Scotland region there is a special reason to celebrate Fairtrade fortnight, because just last week Dumfries became the most recent Fairtrade town, joining Castle Douglas, Kirkcudbright, Dunscore and Wigtown, which have already achieved that status. The status represents many years of effort by the Dumfries fair trade group, which was formed five years ago and has been working towards achieving the status for quite some time. There will be a special celebration in the former Bakers Oven in the High Street on Saturday with a fair trade cake. On Sunday, there will be a celebration service at St John’s Church. That is particularly fitting because the churches have been some of the strongest supporters of the campaign to make Dumfries a Fairtrade town. It is a first-class example of ecumenical activity that has brought together members of the Church of Scotland, the Roman Catholic Church, the Quakers, the Episcopalians, the Baptists and the United Reformed Church, which together make up the majority of Christian worshippers in Dumfries As well as churches, schools have played an important part—others have mentioned them, too—in helping Dumfries to achieve the status of a Fairtrade town. I do not think that it is a great surprise that so many people have cited the influence of schools in the fair trade movement, because I think that children have an acute understanding of fairness and what it means. Children in particular understand that it is wrong that the small pleasures that we enjoy can cause pain and suffering to others thousands of miles away. I want to cite one example of that, as we approach Easter, which is chocolate. Children enjoy chocolate, as do many adults, including me—probably too much—but how many of us know that, according to the United Nations Children’s Fund, 200,000 children are victims of child trafficking each year in west and central Africa, where most of the world’s cocoa is produced? We often talk about chocolate being a guilty pleasure, but I am afraid that in this case that is particularly true. There has been progress, thanks to the fair trade movement. In particular, the Kuapa Kokoo farmers co-operative in Ghana, which was established when the internal marketing of cocoa in that country was liberalised in 1993, has made an enormous difference to the lives of people living in cocoa-producing communities. The co-operative works towards improving the social, economic and political wellbeing of members and communities. It has built several schools and has provided sanitation and clean water pumps, which have made a huge difference. Members will be pleased to know that they can support the co-operative by buying Divine chocolate, which is on sale in the Parliament—so they need to feel guilty only about the calories in the chocolate and not about making people suffer as a result of buying it. To return to the case of Dumfries and Galloway, one thing that has been very apparent is that fair trade is not just a moral choice, because it can also be good for businesses. In particular, we have noticed that that is the case for the tourism community. For example, bed and breakfast businesses have reported that they get extra bookings if they can offer visitors Fairtrade tea and coffee and other products. As well as being a moral choice, fair trade makes good business sense. Again, I congratulate George Adam on lodging the motion, and I look forward to an announcement in the near future about Scotland achieving Fairtrade nation status.

Will the approach outlined by the cabinet secretary today impact on the education of teachers at university level? If so, will he tell us what arrangements have been made to take that forward?

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the big Burns supper that takes place in Dumfries on 27 and 28 January is a wonderful start to the celebrations of the year of creative Scotland? What is she doing to support the festival?

I thank all those members across the parties who supported the motion and who will speak in the debate today. Cuts to the BBC’s radio output are very much in the news this week after it was revealed that one in three Radio Scotland production staff is to lose their job. At First Minister’s question time, we heard the deep concerns about the loss of two high-quality Radio Scotland programmes, “Scotland at Ten” and “Newsweek Scotland”. Their absence will concern members across the chamber and will, no doubt, be discussed in the coming days and weeks. In particular, I look forward to the matter being addressed next Tuesday at the Education and Culture Committee’s timely round-table discussion on broadcasting and democracy in Scotland. However, today I will talk about another radio programme that is threatened by the BBC’s “Delivering Quality First” operational restructuring plans. Politicians are less likely to have heard the music show “Introducing in Scotland” than to have heard the current affairs programmes that are threatened, and I would be surprised if any had ever appeared on it. Nevertheless, we should be just as concerned at its loss. “Introducing in Scotland” has a loyal following of young people and makes a vital contribution to the creative industries, which are among Scotland’s key economic strengths and a growth area for jobs. The “Introducing in Scotland” radio show is hosted by Ally McCrae and is broadcast every Sunday night from midnight to 2 am. It is the only Scottish opt-out on Radio 1 and listeners can also hear it on the internet. The show has a remit to provide the “best new unsigned, undiscovered and under the radar music in Scotland”, and it has an excellent track record—pardon the pun—of doing just that. Under Ally McCrae, this year, and his predecessor, Vic Galloway, in the 11 years before that, “Introducing in Scotland” has been the only outlet on Radio 1 to showcase up-and-coming bands and solo artists from Scotland to a Scottish audience. In addition to the weekly show, which has been moved to something of a graveyard slot in the past year, the show reaches a pan-United Kingdom audience once a month. Pretty much all Scottish success stories from the past decade are where they are today because of early exposure through airplay and live sessions on the show. In fact, two of Scotland’s most successful pop exports, the producer Calvin Harris, from Dumfries, and the band Frightened Rabbit, from Selkirk, who come from the South Scotland region, were first played on the show. Calvin Harris had his first live session on it way back in 2007 and, in a short space of time, was invited to work with Kylie Minogue. That shows the influence that the show has. The BBC’s proposal to replace the show with a UK-wide programme will mean less exposure for the Calvin Harrises of the future. The BBC insists that the weekly UK-wide show with which it wants to replace the opt-outs from Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales will be an improvement, but that is not what fans think, and 7,000 of them have signed a petition to save the Scottish show. Per head of population in Scotland, that is a higher proportion than the number of people in the UK who signed the petition to save BBC 6 Music, which most people will remember as a very successful campaign that achieved its purpose after a blaze of publicity. The campaigners to save “Introducing in Scotland” have been diligent in their enthusiasm over the past few weeks and months. They are not all people who are involved in politics; they are simply driven by a real love of and enthusiasm for new music. They have taken their case to the BBC trustee for Scotland, to the head of Radio 1 in London, to the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs, Ms Hyslop, and to the Minister for Culture, Communications and Creative Industries in London, Ed Vaizey. The campaigners point out that, on average, between 21 and 26 tracks by Scottish artists are played on the show every Sunday. If it is replaced by a UK-wide show, that number will be reduced considerably to about one in four songs on the playlist, and it would be even less if it were determined according to Scotland’s UK population share. The implications are wider than those for one radio show, however enjoyable and popular it is. Many Scottish artists go on to support a network of jobs in Scotland in areas such as marketing, management, tour support, security, promotional opportunities and work for recording studios and session musicians. It is notable that the Musicians Union has been very supportive of the campaign to save “Introducing in Scotland”. The music industry in Scotland is a real strength. We can see that in the growth of the festivals movement, which results in thousands of tourists coming to Scotland. In the past two decades, live performances here have increased by 82 per cent. Many music business contacts to whom I have spoken, including Paolo Nutini’s manager, Brendan Moon, who is a big supporter of the campaign, believe that the 82 per cent growth is linked directly to shows such as “Introducing in Scotland” and the talent that they promote. It is the BBC’s role, as a public service provider, to serve hard-to-reach audiences, which includes young people. The BBC has a duty to showcase culture and to support talent development in every part of the UK. The moving of the show to London could damage the vibrant music scene in Scotland by limiting access and opportunities for Scottish artists to be heard. It is important to talk about access because, at present, the show is based in Glasgow. For people throughout the country from places such as Inverness and Aberdeen and from rural areas such as Selkirk, Glasgow is much more accessible than London, where they will have no relationship at all with the producers. I will finish with the words of Scott Hutchison of Frightened Rabbit, who began in Selkirk. He said: “It would be a travesty if the show was cut from the BBC radio schedule in Scotland, and scrapping it would reinforce the popular fallacy that the industry does not exist outside London.”

Will the member take an intervention?

Since David Cameron’s intervention in the referendum debate, 300 people have joined the SNP. How many people have joined the Conservative Party?

Richard Baker raised the issue of economic uncertainty as a result of the timing of the referendum. That comes as a surprise, given that such a view has been pretty universally demolished by people such as David Watt from the Institute of Directors and our offshore operators, all of whom say that there is no such uncertainty. To those voices, I add another that came to my attention this morning—Professor Brian Ashcroft, whose name will not be unknown on this side of the chamber. In the Scottish Economy Watch blog, under the title “Referendum blues, or not”, Professor Ashcroft considers UK ministers’ assertions that “the Scottish independence referendum is risking business confidence and preventing investment in Scotland”, asks “Who is correct?” and says: “The evidence to date favours Alex Salmond. There is no indication in the aggregate foreign direct investment ... statistics of a downturn in inward investment to Scotland relative to the rest of the UK. The latest Ernst & Young 2011 UK Attractiveness Survey shows the number of projects coming into Scotland rising ... Indeed, despite the dominance of London and the South East in terms of projects, Scotland, by far, attracted the most employment”. I hope that, with people as widely respected as Professor Ashcroft coming into the debate, we can knock that particular argument on the head once and for all. As for the Conservative group leader’s assertion that those who suggest that what is happening is anti-Scottish are somehow narrow in their politics, I make absolutely no apology for saying that the Liberals, the Labour Party and the Tories are anti-Scottish in coming together to defy the will of the Scottish people and the democratic mandate that they gave us to hold a referendum at a time of our choosing, which, as the First Minister said, would be the latter half of the parliamentary session. The sight of those parties cosying up on the sofas of various Scottish television studios will really alarm the people of Scotland.

I did not address my comments to the people of Scotland; I addressed my comments to the Labour Party, the Conservative Party and the Liberal Democrats, who—thank goodness—do not represent the people of Scotland and were in their entirety outpolled by the SNP last year, as the First Minister said. The anti-independence parties stood together against Scottish democracy yesterday in Westminster. That will be no surprise to the people of Scotland, because for four years between 2007 and 2011 those parties stood together to stop a referendum. Now they want to dictate the terms of a referendum. They want to exclude the young people of Scotland from choosing their future, but their elderly Labour peers down south say that they should have a say, even though they do not live here. The electorate told Labour what they thought of that strategy last May, but Labour seems to have learned nothing. On the Labour motion, I gently remind members that they had six months to work collaboratively with the SNP. We reached out to them on the constitution last year and urged them to suggest ways to take Scotland forward. We offered steps that fall far short of our ideal of independence or even devo max. Members could have brought forward proposals for job-creating powers during discussions in the Scotland Bill Committee. I sat on the committee with Willie Rennie for several months. He talked about wanting more powers for the Scottish Parliament; why did he not make one suggestion on more powers in all the time that he sat on the Scotland Bill Committee? He did not even back the idea of devolving responsibility for the Crown estate to Scotland, even though that is a long-standing Liberal Democrat policy.

I am not sure what Willie Rennie thinks the Scottish Parliament or its committee system is for, if he does not think that that is the appropriate place in which to raise his stated objective of extending the Parliament’s powers. Willie Rennie did not listen to us, but he could have listened to the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations, which asked for welfare to be devolved, to protect the vulnerable. He could have listened to the Wise Group’s sensible suggestion that Jobcentre Plus be devolved, to create a streamlined employment service. I remind the anti-independence parties—

So have you, but mine is a bit more inspiring for the people of Scotland.

I remind the anti-independence parties of Scotland’s ancient motto. It is, “No one provokes me with impunity”—or “Don’t mess with me.” We know that David Cameron does not speak that language. He has a tin ear for Scots and it is sad that most of the anti-independence parties in the Parliament also seem to have a tin ear for Scots.

I speak today as a member of the Education and Culture Committee. In November, as a result of our inquiry into looked-after children—in particular, some of the quite dispiriting evidence that the committee heard in the course of it—I asked the Cabinet Secretary for Justice whether he could tell me what proportion of prisoners who are currently held in Scottish jails were previously classified as looked-after children. Up-to-date figures were not available at that point, but I was pleased to hear from Mr MacAskill that, in 2011, for the first time, prisoners had been asked a question along those lines as part of the Scottish prison survey. That is information that we must have, because there is a recognition that detrimental experiences early in life can have devastating effects on the path that that life takes. I am pleased to tell the chamber that the information is now available, although the picture that it paints is a matter of great concern and cost—human as well as financial—to society. I have a letter from Mr John Ewing, the chief executive of the Scottish Prison Service, in which he informs me that, last year, 28 per cent of prisoners in Scotland defined themselves as having been in care as a child. That is almost one in three. To translate that percentage into flesh and blood, 28 per cent of the 8,140 prisoners who were in custody last year amounts to 2,779 prisoners. It costs £32,146 to keep a person in prison for a year in Scotland. Therefore, I estimate that the bill for prisoners who were looked after as children comes to £73.2 million. What a terrible waste, not just of money but of human potential. I am afraid that that is likely to be an underestimate because the question that was asked was whether prisoners had been in care as children as opposed to being under some sort of supervision order at home. That is significant because, as Mr Maxwell and others have said, the Education and Culture Committee found that the lowest-achieving children were those who remained with their families, as opposed to those who were with foster parents or in residential care. Children who stayed at home were far more likely to pay truant from school—with parental consent or, more often, because of parental indifference. Such children are more likely to be left to wander the streets, leaving them vulnerable to becoming involved in substance abuse, gangs and criminal behaviour. As we know, once offending behaviour starts, it becomes difficult to break the cycle. Once a young person enters the prison system, their chances of becoming a repeat offender escalate. We all agree that we need to find ways of preventing offending in the first place. Tackling the issue of looked-after children seems a good place to start. I therefore welcome the efforts of the Government and its predecessor in this area. I am particularly impressed with the evidence that was given to us by CELCIS. Having a centre of excellence for looked-after children is a great step forward. As the minister said, having a designated manager in schools is an important advance, as is the national parenting strategy. I particularly welcome the emphasis on fewer placements and more permanence in placing children in care. However, given all the evidence that the committee received, I am inclined to agree with Stewart Maxwell that tougher and trickier decisions might need to be made for children who are looked after at home. That may mean intervening earlier to remove children from damaging home environments, and sometimes it may mean intervening before the child has been born. Even the best national parenting strategy in the world and the most outstanding support are sometimes not enough for those children. In that regard, I welcome the Government’s commitment to increasing the number of people coming forward as foster parents. What struck me during the committee’s inquiry was—as other members have mentioned—the amount of legislation and guidelines that have been passed and issued by the Parliament, stretching right back to its inception. However, despite the huge amount of detailed material, it seemed to the committee that communication between agencies still requires improvement, and the way in which guidelines are followed in schools and in education and social work departments can be patchy. These are Scotland’s children and, as the minister said, we as MSPs are responsible for them as corporate parents. However, we should be wary of trying to tackle administrative failings by piling on more administration, policy guidelines and instructions from on high. At the risk of sounding facetious, I could not help thinking during the inquiry that perhaps less would be more. If there was less emphasis on rules, guidelines, legislation and paperwork, and if more people took responsibility for the fate of individual children, we all might make more progress. I am pleased to report that, in our fieldwork, we saw evidence of adults taking responsibility in that way. I was very impressed by one guidance teacher in a large secondary school in Glasgow who took a personal interest in the children in her institution. On one occasion, she had gone to a child’s house to ensure that they attended an interview for an important college place, because she knew that nobody else would do it and nobody else cared. We should bear in mind that this debate is not only about children. Inside every adult, there is a child, and inside far too many adults, there is a child who has been failed.

I am a graduate of the University of Glasgow, so it is tempting to use the debate for a bit of self-indulgent comment about the best days of my life, when I rubbed shoulders with such luminaries as Wendy Alexander and Fiona Hyslop, who were my contemporaries. However, that is all ancient history; I want to talk about the university today. I endorse everything that has been said about the university’s activities in the west end of Glasgow, where I still live, and about its magnificent Gothic sandstone buildings, but I want to talk about some equally magnificent sandstone buildings elsewhere in Scotland, which also belong to the university. The Crichton campus, in Dumfries, is set in 85 acres of parkland, with views over the Solway Firth. Its beautiful setting belies a somewhat turbulent academic history in recent years. In 2007, it was threatened with closure but was saved by a £1.5 million grant from the Scottish National Party Government, through the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council. Earlier this year, the campus appeared to be under threat again, when the university authorities decided to end the liberal arts programme at the campus when the current crop of students have completed their degrees. There was fear among members of all parties in the Parliament that the decision threatened the long-term future of the Crichton campus. I am pleased that the reassurance that the university authorities gave us has been borne out and that their intention to reorganise courses in Dumfries to secure the campus’s future appears to be bearing fruit. In particular, the university has been extremely successful in attracting international students. I will talk a little about what international students can expect when they come to study at the Crichton campus in Dumfries. Two thirds of the postgraduate taught degrees have international students, who come from Malawi, India, Azerbaijan, Taiwan, Kazakhstan and China, as well as the European Union. Dumfries campus has a long tradition of welcoming students on the Erasmus exchange programme, particularly from Spain and Germany. Why do those students come to that corner of Scotland? There is the great outdoors and the easy access to the Galloway hills, the southern uplands and the English Lake District. The scenery is important, but it is the outdoor activities that are particularly attractive to young people. We have the Seven Stanes, which is a series of world-class mountain biking centres, which are operated by Forestry Commission Scotland. There are 400km of trails for cyclists of all abilities. The long coastline offers great opportunities for water sports, such as kayaking, sailing and canoeing. Of course, it is the quality of the education that is on offer at the Crichton campus, as much as it is the environment, that draws students from across the world. There is an emphasis on environmental studies. The Crichton carbon centre conducts research into carbon management and offers the UK’s first MSc in the subject, which is a 12-month full-time and 24-month part-time course. It is an ideal part of the world to study that subject. Extensive fieldwork is undertaken along with environmental charities that work in the area. Graduates of the course come out with the tools to tackle greenhouse gas emissions, which can be applied in work throughout the world. That underlines Scotland’s reputation in the area. As well as environmental studies, the interdisciplinary school at the Crichton campus offers health and social studies. There is an excellent primary teaching course over four years that attracts students from throughout Europe and a heritage and tourism course, which is particularly appropriate in that part of the world, which is the home of Burns and Robert the Bruce. Students can mix all those courses together in an interdisciplinary degree, which is in line with the thinking on cross-curriculum education. I congratulate the University of Glasgow and the Government on ensuring the future of the Crichton campus. The campus contributes £311 million to the Dumfries and Galloway economy, so that is money well spent. I look forward to the future for the Crichton campus in Dumfries.

Will the member take an intervention?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the effect on psychiatric patients of the healing spaces project not being installed timeously at the Midpark hospital in Dumfries. (S4O-00407)

I am sure that I can pass on the gratitude of my constituents who are involved in the project to the national health service workers in Dumfries and Galloway who have worked hard to make it happen. Will the minister join me in acknowledging the important contribution that the arts make to psychiatric therapy?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive how many and what proportion of prisoners were previously looked-after children. (S4O-00374)

The cabinet secretary will be aware that the Education and Culture Committee is examining the educational attainment of looked-after children. Does he agree that investment in the education and care of looked-after children, particularly in their early years, will feed into the Government’s preventative agenda and will affect justice budgets in future years?

I confess that when I first read the term “placemaking” in the motion I winced a little, because “placemaking” is not a particularly elegant word. It has the whiff of the council planning committee about it—and I say that with the greatest respect to the many councillors who are present and to the cabinet secretary, who is elegant in all matters. Although place making may be an inelegant piece of jargon from the 1970s, it has an impeccable pedigree as an idea. Indeed, it has its roots here in Scotland in the work of Patrick Geddes, whom the cabinet secretary mentioned. Geddes is regarded as being the father of modern planning, but he began his working life as a botanist. He believed that the balance that is found in nature should be present in the built environment, too. Like John Ruskin in England, whom the cabinet secretary also mentioned, he worried about the community dislocation that the industrial revolution of the 19th century had caused. Both men believed in social progress and believed that it was essential to link social progress and spatial form. It is a great pity that the 20th century town planners and architects who were responsible for Patricia Ferguson’s unpleasant childhood experiences did not study Geddes, but the superorganised machines for living that Le Corbusier favoured, which ripped the soul out of so many of our urban areas. In contrast, Geddes spoke of the trilogy of place, folk and work, all three of which he believed had to be in balance. He used the old town in Edinburgh as the laboratory for his ideas. In the 18th century, the shift of political power that followed the adjournment of the Parliament meant that the old town became neglected and unfashionable, and it fell into disrepair. Geddes set about reviving the tenements and wynds. He tried to bring different social classes together in residential halls like Milne’s court. He gave us Ramsay Gardens and the outlook tower, and regenerated and protected a total of 70 sites. He did not just preach renewal—he practised it by cleaning closes and digging gardens. He was to some extent a romantic, in that he was returning to an idealised medieval Edinburgh, but without the squalor. Like many members who have spoken in the debate, he understood the importance of place, people and continuity, as well as that of cultural identity, which the cabinet secretary mentioned. That is why I support the calls of the cabinet secretary and of Labour for a VAT reduction on repairs. When we in Scotland first began to revive Geddes’s theories about returning to human-scale mixed communities, we did not always get it right. Many inner-city regeneration projects of the 1980s used brick, which is a material that has very little connection with most of Scotland, which is a land of stone. Geology defines our towns, villages and cities as much as it defines the rocky outcrops and headlands of the countryside. From the Caithness flag on the roofs of Orkney long houses to the red sandstone of Dumfries and the grey granite of Dalbeattie in the south, it contributes to Scotland’s sense of locality and diversity, so any talk about place making and architecture in the Scottish context must include mention of stone as a building material. The Government’s commitment to retaining traditional buildings and the traditional skills strategy to upgrade those buildings are particularly welcome. The use of stone does not mean ossification. Stone can be used in design that is innovative as well as being sympathetic to the past. A good example of that from the South Scotland area that I represent is the Scottish Seabird Centre in North Berwick, which makes a bold statement without frightening the puffins or, indeed, the people of North Berwick. Its most notable feature is the exterior wall of whinstone, which looks like a dry-stane dyke, but which acts as a rain screen for the rest of the building, drying out quickly and preventing mould and salt damage. I would therefore like to draw Parliament’s attention to the “Land of Stone” exhibition in the Lighthouse gallery in Glasgow, which explains the use of stone as a building material, and to the work of Architecture and Design Scotland, which looks at the challenges of using stone as a material. One of those challenges is scarcity. There were 1,200 quarries in 19th century Scotland and now there are 20. However, there have been some interesting innovations, such as snatch quarrying, which involves opening up an old quarry for a short time for small amounts of stone for regeneration. Another issue is landfill; quarries are often used for landfill. If we use them for landfill, we will not have access to the stone to keep our heritage alive. I draw members’ attention to the need to make our heritage buildings sustainable. We are not going to meet our climate change targets solely through new build. It is easy to make new build sustainable, but the big challenge will be to do that with our older buildings, because 80 per cent of the buildings that will exist in 2050 are standing today. I was fortunate enough to be invited to Glasgow School of Art last week in my capacity as a member of the Education and Culture Committee. The GSA contains the Mackintosh environmental architecture centre, and it was interesting to hear about the work that it is doing in that area. The communal living of Scotland’s stone tenements and lands is ideally suited to the adaptation of communal heating systems, either through biomass, ground-source heat or wind power. I am sure that Patrick Geddes would approve of that, and I hope that the new architectural strategy will consider coupling preservation of our heritage with preservation of the planet.

I want to focus on one particular aspect of the motion, which is the reference to attainment for all children. We have rightly concentrated on the life chances of children who are economically disadvantaged, but I want to talk about another group of children. John Pentland mentioned them, which I acknowledge and appreciate; they are children with disabilities. If we are really going to get things right for every child, we have to realise that that includes children who do not have the same intellectual abilities as other children. They still deserve to reach their full potential, and they deserve a meaningful education that is purposeful, that builds their self-esteem and which equips them with skills for life as well as with qualifications. Those principles are embedded in curriculum for excellence, and we all sign up to them. Successive Governments have made considerable progress in supporting children with additional support needs, in particular with the Education (Additional Support for Learning) (Scotland) Act 2004, which was strengthened in 2009. That gave children with additional support needs and their parents the ability to demand more assessment, and it introduced more joined-up thinking between education and health authorities. However, it does not seem to translate in every case into schools and how pupils and parents experience education. Last week, I attended a meeting to launch Enable’s report “Bridging the Training Gap”, which looked at how young people experience teaching for special needs. Enable’s young families support committee last year identified lack of understanding in some classroom teachers—not all—as being a major barrier to successful learning for children and young people. Enable did research that has resulted in the report that was published last week. It looked at how well teachers and learning support assistants are trained initially and through on-going professional development. It wrote to all the local authorities and universities that offer initial teacher education courses, and the findings were quite surprising and shocking. No local authority in Scotland makes training in learning disabilities such as autism, dyslexia and Down’s syndrome mandatory. They offer many courses on additional support needs but, as they are defined in legislation, additional support needs can include all sorts of challenges, such as bullying and disrupted education. Those issues are addressed in training, but the specific needs of people with learning disabilities are not addressed in mandatory training. Further, although the Government’s legislation is advanced and encouraging, only nine local authorities provided copies of documents on Government policies and on parents’ and children’s rights. Another problem is that a lot of parents do not seem to know about commendable initiatives such as the autism toolbox and other laudable aspects of policy development that the Government has undertaken. The picture is also patchy in university training courses. Eight universities in Scotland offer initial teacher education through bachelor of education courses, and they also offer—as part of those courses—general training for additional support needs. However, only three of the courses include specific learning disability issues as mandatory course content. The Enable report shows that the effect of that on parents’ and children’s experiences has in some cases been shocking. Children with Down’s syndrome have been left on their own because a particular teacher could not cope, with no attempt to get them the materials that they need, such as large-type books. Enable found that one teacher complained to parents that their autistic child needed to learn to socialise better, when most of us with even a cursory knowledge of autism know that the central challenge of autism is that autistic children are not able to socialise. There are signs of considerable progress. The Donaldson report made 50 recommendations about teacher training, including a recommendation concerning the skills that are required to teach learning-disabled students. It is encouraging that HMIE’s submission to that report noted that student teachers identified that as a priority and said that they want to be better trained in that regard. I therefore welcome the Government’s commitment to implementing Donaldson’s recommendations. I also welcome the legislation on the rights of young people and children and the proposed children’s services bill, which could help to entrench the rights that we have already established. However, the Enable report makes the point strongly that legislation is not everything and that legislation does not always translate into work on the ground. As the minister and Liam McArthur have said, local authorities’ putting policy into practice can be patchy.

Enable Scotland is calling for learning disability training to be mandatory for initial teacher training and on-going professional development. I urge all local authorities and universities to consider that seriously. Beyond legislation, the key problem is one of attitude, and we all need to think carefully about our attitudes to this specific group of children. Getting it right for every child means getting it right for every child, regardless of their intellectual ability.

Will the member take an intervention?

While researching this topic on the National Library of Scotland’s website, I came across a piece of work by William Topaz McGonagall of Dundee, who is unkindly remembered as the worst poet in the English language. It was entitled, “The Burial of Mr Gladstone, the Great Political Hero”. It was 1898, and Liberals were quite popular in Scotland in those days—I can say that because none of them is here. The poem begins: “Alas! the people now do sigh and moan For the loss of Wm Ewart Gladstone, Who was a very great politician and a moral man, And to gainsay it there’s few people can.” I am sure that—political affiliations aside—any of us would be proud to have that verse as an epitaph. The poem was published as a broadside; broadsides were simple, cheap sheets of paper that were sold on the street for a penny or less by pedlars and chapmen. They were enormously popular in Scotland because of the high rates of literacy here, and they give us a valuable insight into the lives of plain folk. The National Library of Scotland holds a quarter of a million broadsides, and some of them can be read in its digital archive, in a section called, “The Word on the Street”. The collection can be browsed by subject, and it quickly becomes apparent that what sold papers 200 years ago is not all that different from what sells papers today—indeed, the term “gutter press” has its origins in this street literature. Broadsides predated newspapers, which were taxed by the Government and were, therefore, out of the reach of ordinary people. Media studies is often maligned, which I believe is wrong, because it records and interprets our society. The ability to read broadsides online is a wonderful addition to media education and social history. For example, a modern student looking at those broadsides would realise that taste—especially bad taste—stays fairly constant over the centuries. The National Library’s collection reveals an obsession with ghoulish subjects, such as body snatching, and a morbid market for the last words of condemned men and women as they stepped up to the gallows, as well as an obsession with sex and sentimentality. A real obsession with the sex life of Robert Burns comes through in the collection. As well as feeding salacious appetites, the broadsides served a serious purpose. They were the principal means of exchanging ideas and, in many ways, they were the internet of the day. They featured a wide-ranging mix of the academic and the scandalous. There was titillation, but they were also an agent for social change and gave the mass of the population a way to challenge the powerful elite. The National Library has digitised 135 political broadsides through its learning zone, which will be really useful in the classroom. One broadside called “Caledonia’s Determination”, from an anonymous radical poet, quite tickled me. It comes from the 1830s, around the time of the Chartist movement, and it reads: “Caledonia no more shall by Tories be school’d, Too long by the knaves she's already been ruin’d: And the Whig's but a Tory in sheep-skin disguise, On the loaves and the fishes each fixes his eyes”. The library notes that the broadside may well “strike a chord with modern-day readers.” There is much more similar material in public and private collections around Scotland, and it is essential that Scotland has a national strategy for digitising it and linking up cultures throughout the country. The National Library plays a leading role in promoting that, but many other projects have been mentioned today. It is important in putting content online that users can share and use it on sites such as YouTube, Facebook, Flickr and Twitter without—as George Adam said—needing a complicated Microsoft plug-in to access it. In that spirit, I highlight David Stewart’s praise for Tobar an Dualchais—or Kist o Riches in Scots—which is a digitised archive of thousands of hours of ordinary people singing and telling stories about their working and family lives. It is based on many of the recordings that Hamish Henderson collected for the school of Scottish studies, which were originally recorded on reel-to-reel tape recorders and wax cylinders. Donnie Munro is the chairman of the project, as David Stewart mentioned, and I spoke to him about the project just before it was launched. He mentioned that when he wanted to access an old song or check some facts during his days in Runrig, he would have to go from wherever he was—Skye, or Lochaber—to the school of Scottish studies. Once there, he would go into the archive, make notes and take them away. The Tobar an Dualchais website allows young musicians to download thousands of hours of really rare work on their iPods; it is a real inspiration. They can cross-reference different subjects throughout Scotland and click on a map of Scotland’s regions to pull out stories of people’s working lives. Last week, as Jean Urquhart said, we debated Scottish studies in schools. I think that today’s debate is an extension of that, but it is important for us to remember that heritage is not just about homework. We need a sense of ownership of our culture as a living thing. We have made a lot of progress in getting stuff online, but it is not enough just to create a digital museum. One big phenomenon on the internet is the mash-up, in which people take pieces of film and music and change them. Millions of teenagers have created their own mash-up versions of scenes from the Harry Potter films and “Star Wars”, for example—

Okay. One of the most-viewed pieces of Scots language on YouTube is a film of the actor Dustin Hoffman looking out over the Manhattan skyline as he praises the culinary delights of stovies in a strong Aberdeenshire Doric. It is comedy, of course, but if our culture and language are to remain vibrant and engaging, we must allow people the freedom to mess around and have fun with them, even if it offends professional sensibilities. We must remember that the popular culture of the past could be crass and earthy, too. If our digital heritage is to be preserved, it must not be precious. It should be easy and enjoyable to share it and change it—just as easy as it was to buy a broadside from a pedlar in the streets of Edinburgh, Haddington or Dumfries 200 years ago.

I, too, congratulate Christine Grahame on securing the debate. I am disappointed that Dumfries and Galloway and the Scottish Borders have been left out of the list of proposed locations for local TV licences. The decision once again leaves the areas unsatisfactorily provided for. Notwithstanding the issues of quality that have correctly been raised, local TV has the potential if properly funded to enrich a community with a number of services. Its benefits include economic activity and the provision of local jobs, as well as the opportunity to provide a platform for local advertising and boost commercial activity in rural areas. Jeremy Hunt’s plans bring nothing of the benefits to a region that is, as we have heard, already deprived of media and insufficiently provided for in Scottish news, current affairs and cultural programming. Aileen McLeod and Christine Grahame highlighted that, during the elections, many viewers in the south of Scotland were insufficiently informed of the real issues at stake in May. If provision for local TV were based on need, our area would surely be the first in the queue, as 250,000 viewers in the south of Scotland fail to receive adequate programming on a daily basis and are, therefore, cut out of the democratic debate. Although the region receives BBC Scotland, the reception of Radio Scotland is very poor. I am sure that members have had the experience of driving down the M74 and, on reaching the Lowther Hills, having to switch to Radio 4. It is absolutely ridiculous that people across the south of Scotland can hear Radio 4 as clear as a bell but they cannot hear Radio Scotland. For example, even when Radio Scotland broadcast a debate from Dumfries during the election, people could not hear it. I submitted a response to Mr Hunt’s consultation because, given the unique need in the south of Scotland, I would have thought that we were deserving of the local TV licence. Unfortunately, the proposals from the UK Government and Ofcom address areas that are already well served by the media. The parameters that have been set out to identify proposed locations may be open to challenge on public interest grounds, given the fact that they are designed to identify only transmitters that serve the largest number of people in the UK and are weighted in favour of urban conurbations. In my consultation response, I stated that I believed that rolling out superfast broadband to southern Scotland was an absolute prerequisite and that only its introduction can truly meet the aspirations of the people who live there. It is plain silly that, at the moment, the south of Scotland is considered less Scottish for broadcasting purposes. It is, after all, the place that gave us James Hogg and Walter Scott, and Robert Burns produced his best work there. It is also the birthplace of the rugby sevens and home to Queen of the South and dozens of other Scottish football clubs. Mr Hunt’s belief that, in the future, all local TV should be made available through something called internet protocol TV again highlights the fact that he does not get the picture. In order to make IPTV available to viewers in the south of Scotland, the UK Government would have to fund superfast broadband adequately, and a number of organisations throughout the south of Scotland have indicated that £68 million for the whole of Scotland simply is not enough to fund broadband. As the cabinet secretary pointed out earlier, we have 32 per cent of the UK’s geographic area, and we are already behind the curve when it comes to access. Mr Hunt’s energy should be focused on that and on the issue of an all-Scotland licence for television. I accept the argument that has been made about STV being too focused on central Scotland’s cities. I have had talks with STV executives, who have assured me that an all-Scotland licence would adequately serve the rural areas in southern Scotland. However, we should not wait until 2014 to get that coverage. Although the licence will be renewed in 2014, we can put pressure on to have Scottish news provided for the south of Scotland before then. For that reason, I will write to Jeremy Hunt, Ofcom in England and ITV, urging them to act to make that happen as soon as possible, to address the unique interests of the area.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive how police and fire service reform will enhance the services’ accountability in Dumfries and Galloway. (S4O-00229)

Does the cabinet secretary believe that we will be able to enhance accountability to local communities? He will be aware that Dumfries and Galloway is a very large area—Dumfries is 70 miles from Stranraer. Will he expand a little on how we may improve the service to smaller, rural communities?

The great African novelist Chinua Achebe said: “No one can teach me who I am.” He meant that we need to look inside ourselves to be comfortable in our skin, whatever colour our skin happens to be and whatever language we happen to speak. That is especially relevant to the core principles of curriculum for excellence, which is about the creation of confident learners and active citizens—something that cannot be imposed from the outside. It hinges on a sense of self-respect and a sense of self-worth. I opened with the quote from Achebe not just because his novel “Things Fall Apart” is one of the greatest of the 20th century, but because the debate can benefit Scotland by looking at Scottish studies in an international context. Achebe is from a sizeable minority inside Nigeria called the Igbo, and “Things Fall Apart” looks at how colonialism and Christianity fracture the social cohesion of a 19th century Igbo village in an incredibly subtle way. Although Achebe celebrates the traditional way of life and the social values of the community, he is also sensitive to its cruelty and occasional superstition. Achebe shies away from moral absolutes in his work, saying: “I never will take the stand that the Old must win or that the New must win. ... No single man can be correct all the time”. To that, he later added that no single culture can be correct all the time, observing that “what is good among one people is an abomination with others.” I am aware of the difficulties and potential offensiveness that are inherent in comparing Scotland’s experience to that of peoples from former colonies of the British empire. As Jean Urquhart and John Finnie have said, Scots played their part in that empire as soldiers, slave traders, plantation owners and land grabbers. However, we have some things in common. It took Achebe a long time to be published in the English language because most editors at the time did not recognise his experiences as being valid subjects for literature. That was back in the 1950s and relates to racist treatment of him. Members may think that the situation has changed over the years. However, several decades later, in 1994, there was a row when James Kelman won the Booker prize for “How Late It Was, How Late”, which describes the experiences of a Glasgow man who has been struck blind as he tries to deal with the authorities and convince them of the validity of his illness. The book was inspired by Kelman’s work with asbestos victims on Clydeside and their struggle to have the disease recognised by the authorities. The Booker judges fell out over the novel, with some, such as Julia Neuberger, saying that it was the work of a “savage”. In London, The Times columnist Simon Jenkins said that the award of the Booker prize to Kelman “contrived to insult literature and patronise the savage”. Kelman responded by saying: “My culture and my language have the right to exist, and no one has the authority to dismiss that right”. He added that “a fine line can exist between elitism and racism. On matters concerning language and culture the distinction can sometimes cease altogether.” It is interesting that Jenkins has since moved to The Guardian, a very different sort of newspaper, in which he recently wrote a column about Scotland under the headline, “It is time for England’s first empire to get independence”. Perhaps he has had time to reflect on his views of 17 years ago. Far from being a savage, Kelman is a thoughtful and intellectual writer whose work is inspired by the linguistic theories of Noam Chomsky. Chomsky found that we all have an innate set of grammatical rules and that all language is valid—bad grammar and bad language do not make a person any less human. When I interviewed Kelman about his more recent novel, “Kieron Smith, Boy”, we spent a long time talking about the language of his characters and how some middle-class Scots are also offended by it. We talked about how our Scots language has changed and is far less rich in vocabulary than it was in the time of Burns. In the 18th century, after the union, elocution classes became all the rage as people struggled to get rid of Scotticisms from their voice. Over time, Scots became considered the language of the crass, the uneducated and the gutter. Scots was not developed in religion or literature for a long time, and it was not used in the classroom, in the courtroom or, latterly, on the television, except perhaps for comedy. That habit continues to this day at every level of society, and James Kelman talks about it in “Kieron Smith, Boy”. He describes Scottish parents’ habit of correcting the way in which their kids speak—I am as guilty of that as other people and correct myself for correcting them—telling them that it is “mummy”, not “mammy”, which is very common in Glasgow. I found out only recently that “mammy” is derived from a Gaelic word—a friend from Barra told me that. All of that has a corrosive effect on our culture, our self-confidence and even our ability to function as citizens. According to Kelman: “Children grow up learning they are inferior and their parents are inferior. Right away you disenfranchise entire segments of society.” For Kelman and Chomsky, syntax itself is universal. We are all capable of expression, even if our language has been systematically destroyed both internally and externally. Kelman believes that the syntactical richness of modern Scots as spoken in the street, not in the poetry reading, is intensified as vocabulary decreases. He points out that the great Russian writers, such as Chekhov, worked with the narrowest vocabulary, yet his work is still great. We could say the same for Samuel Beckett, who is considered a genius. The process that Kelman and Achebe describe is known as inferiorism—when people diminish their culture from the inside. It was originally identified and named by Frantz Fanon, a psychiatrist and philosopher from the French colony of Martinique. He noted that cultures that are dominated by another culture often see that other culture as the bringer of superior ways and universal human values. Political control is asserted by undermining self-belief. It is a form of cringe, in other words, and it extends beyond the way we speak. We see inferiorism in a lot of the discourse in Scottish society today. We talk about ourselves as being uniquely inarticulate and tongue-tied among the nations of the world. We repeat clichés about Scotland being negative, overly sectarian, overly racist, impoverished, intolerant, lacking in ambition, too sexist and too violent. We are all those things but so are other societies. We also have much to celebrate, but our children do not get that validation often enough. It is a phenomenon that Chinua Achebe would immediately recognise and one that will be addressed when our children know their own culture well enough to criticise it constructively and celebrate it too.

The modern world is an interdependent one. Decision making is exercised at many levels of government and across geographical boundaries, so how we operate effectively in a supra-national structure such as the EU has a crucial bearing on what happens in communities far away from Brussels. I was surprised to find out that between 60 and 80 per cent of the legislation that is passed in Scotland originates from the EU. That is an astounding figure, particularly given that Scottish ministers are not represented at meetings of the Council of Ministers. That is not just unfair; it is unusual. As other members have said, other member states have already pioneered a path. It is normal for other federal and devolved legislative bodies in Bavaria, Flanders, Catalonia and Salzburg to speak directly in Brussels. That is also more efficient, given the different policy directions that different regions of member states take. Germany, Belgium, Spain and Austria all allow ministers from their sub-nations and autonomous regions representation in the Council of the EU and power to directly affect legislation and policy regarding issues over which they have competence. We are not asking for a seat on the Council of Europe, although that is our ultimate ambition, as several members of my party have said. The fact that, even though that is the case, we are willing to sign up to a motion that, as others have said, falls far short of that ambition shows that we are far from intransigent and far from indulging in megaphone diplomacy. It is about showing a spirit of compromise and collaboration. It is also about process—James Kelly mentioned that devolution is a process. We are trying to make progress by building consensus. In the motion, we seek to influence policies that are made at an EU level and which are implemented in Scotland so that Scottish ministers can put forward the specific needs of Scots. We seek to build consensus around the motion so that Scotland can catch up, to some extent, with the way in which modern, multilevel states operate to influence the EU, which, for better or worse, has considerable control over all our lives. Scottish ministers should be entitled to attend meetings of the Council of Ministers. The conclusion of the debate should be that attendance at EU meetings be placed on a statutory footing, as in Germany, Belgium, Spain and Austria, because relying on William Hague’s advice to his Cabinet colleagues has been unreliable and ineffective, as the cabinet secretary pointed out. In Germany, when matters that are within the competence of the Länder are discussed in Brussels, a Land minister accompanies the federal minster to meetings of the Council of Ministers and they sit side by side at the negotiating table to decide what is best for the state, based on a true understanding of the citizens’ needs and wishes. Since 1997, before Scottish devolution, Spain has permitted a representative from the autonomous communities to supplement Spanish delegations in Europe. We are way behind. Each of the Austrian Länder has responsibility to represent Austria at the EU if they have responsibility at the national level. Similar to the example of Belgium, Land ministers can take the place of federal ministers in the Council if the negotiation affects their competence. The south of Scotland, which I represent, would greatly benefit if Richard Lochhead, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment, attended agriculture councils to represent our needs. Fishing has been mentioned, but there are many other relevant issues. For example, 300 square miles of the south of Scotland’s land mass is taken up by Galloway forest park. Forestry is managed differently in Scotland and England, so the Scottish forestry strategy must be represented, debated and have an impact on EU policy negotiations at council meetings. I appeal to members of all parties to realise the logic of that position. There is no formal and binding basis for issues that are devolved to Scotland to be represented at the EU level. The test should be: if the EU did not exist would Scottish ministers have competence to act? If so, they should be invited to influence policy that UK ministers advance and should have the right to attend the EU-level meetings where many of the decisions are made.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what is being done to implement the detect cancer early initiative and how it will work in practice. (S4O-00095)

Can the cabinet secretary elaborate on which social groups might benefit from the earlier detection of cancer? It is my understanding that the lower socioeconomic groups will benefit most.

The debate is about connectivity, not just broadband. For many people, their connection comes from the telephone. It seems incredible that it was only in 1985 that the first mobile telephone call was made, by Vodafone, on a device that was probably the same size as the average lady’s handbag—we know how big they can be these days. Since then, mass ownership has made much smaller handsets more commercially available, and the mobile phone is now ubiquitous. In fact, the take-up of mobiles is now greater than that of fixed-line phones. That is especially the case in Scotland, which has the largest proportion of mobile-only households in the UK. Ofcom’s research shows that mobile-only households are more likely to be poor—26 per cent of DE households are entirely dependent on mobiles, compared with only 9 per cent of ABC1 homes. I want to consider the old-fashioned technology that we now call 2G, which provides a basic voice and text service and has been around since the days when mobiles looked like bricks. It is also the technology that many poor families depend on. However, our coverage is still antediluvian. In Scotland, there is 2G coverage in 64 per cent of our geographical area, whereas that figure is 91 per cent in the rest of the UK. We are living in an age of digital and geographic inequality. Alex Johnstone earlier compared broadband to vital services such as electricity and plumbing. If someone does not have access to a phone, it is like not having access to healthcare and education. As was mentioned earlier, we are finding that a great number of rural areas suffer from the digital black holes called not-spots, where people cannot access mobile services. Another Ofcom report, from last November, blamed commercial factors for the existence of those not-spots in rural areas and said that they seem likely to persist, to some degree. The impact of not-spots ranges from inconvenience, such as a postponed or missed call, to personal or business cost implications. Ofcom’s report included case studies, one of which struck me as indicating the potentially life-threatening implications of not-spots. It involved the case of a farmer who died in the hills during snowy weather, whose body lay for two days without being located. That happened in an area where there was no mobile phone coverage. Another lady in Scotland who drove a rural school bus pointed out that she had no way of dealing with any problems that might arise during her long journey, which involved dropping off lots of children in various locations. For a lot of operators, 2G coverage is not a priority, as they are moving into more lucrative areas. However, 3G coverage is even worse than 2G coverage. In Scotland, we have 41 per cent 3G coverage, compared with 76 per cent across the UK. It is surely no coincidence that the figure for the rest of the UK is lowered by poor coverage in devolved areas, a point that was repeatedly made in the Ofcom report on UK connectivity that was published last November. There might just be a connection between our lack of connection and our lack of political control. Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have the poorest service. We are entirely in London’s hands on this matter. We depend on politicians there to license telecom operators properly, to regulate them and to place obligations on mobile operators to deliver specified levels of coverage. As the poor 2G and 3G coverage demonstrates, the record of London in meeting the needs of Scottish rural areas is extremely poor. For example, in 2000, when 3G licences were distributed, the UK Government determined that operators were required to achieve 80 per cent coverage of the UK as a whole, increasing to 90 per cent by 2013. At the time of that licence consultation, the Scottish Government—a Labour-Liberal Democrat coalition—quite rightly pressed the UK Labour Government to specify coverage on a regional basis, and said that there should be 90 per cent coverage per region. However, the Scottish Government was rebuffed by the London Government and it continues to be rebuffed. Richard Lochhead said that 4G, which will be auctioned in the near future, will help to solve some of the problems of the past with 2G and 3G connection. Again, however, we can only make representations that no one—not the Government nor Ofcom—is obliged to heed. It seems to me that this is all a matter of where power lies. One of the problems is that the UK Government has decided to focus on competition for the next 4G spectrum auction. However, the case that the Scottish Government has made is that, for much of rural Scotland, unbridled competition is not the way forward. There could be three companies competing in one area while another area gets nothing. Members have commented on the inadequacy of the private sector in providing broadband and mobile phone service coverage in Scotland. In many ways the situation is similar to the situation in the Victorian period, when utilities such as gas and water were being put in and the work was entirely in the hands of private enterprise. Competing companies were digging up roads and there was no strategic overview, so in places such as Glasgow and Birmingham the city councils stepped in to ensure that provision would be closer to being universal. If we want a universal system, we need control of telecoms in Scotland. If that does not happen, we will not be a hot spot and we will continue to have far too many not-spots.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what support it is providing to the south of Scotland alliance bid for a share of the broadband delivery United Kingdom fund. (S4O-00079)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that it is highly unsatisfactory that what is now an essential part of our economic development and education is dependent on an auction decided by the UK Government?

I will take full advantage of it. I thank Jenny Marra for her kind comments, although I think that her modesty was misplaced, as her contribution was very impressive. Like her, I am very interested in the cultural influence on our economy and in the way that cities can benefit from, in particular, the creative industries. One of the world’s leading thinkers in this field is Professor Richard Florida of the University of Toronto. He has identified what he calls a “creative class” of “high bohemians” who bring dynamism and energy to the places where they go to live, and stimulate economic regeneration—it is the power of cool, so to speak. Such creative clusters exist all over the world. Some of the more famous examples are Palo Alto in California, Vancouver in Canada and Bangalore in India. It is particularly pleasing that Professor Florida has identified Glasburgh—the Edinburgh-Glasgow corridor—as one of Europe’s creative mega-regions. I would add Dundee to that, as Jenny Marra told us about Dundee’s incredible contribution to culture in Scotland, to form a mega-triangle of creativity. It is not only our urban areas that benefit from this cluster effect, because it moves out into the hinterland of the cities. We now talk about city regions as areas for development. I will talk about an industry that combines creativity with technology and can have a huge impact on the growth of urban and rural areas: the computer games industry. Scotland has 10 per cent of the UK computer games industry and is now the third region for computer games development in Europe. The industry is rapidly changing. Games used to come in packages, and still come in packages sold through shops and delivered by the road, but that has changed a lot, with a resulting impact on the industry’s carbon footprint, because now the trend is towards online games, network gaming and social games played through networks such as Facebook. Games are also played on all sorts of screens. Computer games is a bit of a misnomer because games are played on tablets and, increasingly, on mobile phones. That means that they can be developed anywhere, so geography does not matter when it comes to developing computer games. The most successful mobile game to date, “Angry Birds”, was born in Finland. It has generated revenue of $70 million from development costs of $140,000. I was delighted when the Hare brothers of Outplay announced earlier this year that they were coming back from America to their native Scotland to set up a similar mobile games company in Dundee. We also have our own homegrown examples of mobile games, such as the football game “Championship Manager” by Dynamo Games, which won the best sports game in the international mobile gaming awards in 2011. I am glad that the Scottish Government has recognised the importance of the video games industry through its creative industries strategy and the work of Scottish Enterprise. There is still more to do and, in particular, I urge the minister to take note of reports by the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts and the Scottish Affairs Select Committee at Westminster that, while we produce lots of creative people, we must ensure that they have the mathematics and programming skills to make their imaginations come to life. An emphasis on STEM subjects—science, technology, engineering and mathematics—in schools is essential. That is something that we can do here in this Parliament with the power that we have over education. However, the industry faces additional challenges that our limited economic powers in this Parliament cannot address adequately. The recession has hit the games industry in this country particularly hard. Across the UK as a whole, the sector has contracted by 9 per cent between 2008 and 2010. In Scotland, the size of the development workforce shrank by 18 per cent last year. Our difficulties have nothing to do with a lack of talent or creativity, because we excel in those areas. A report for Scottish Enterprise two years ago called “Digital Inspiration: Strategy for Scotland’s Digital Media Industry” found that the Scottish gaming industry was world leading when it came to innovation, which is a tribute to our colleges and schools. However, the report also found that we need to be better at growing our digital-savvy companies, upscaling them and building on the talent that we have because, often, our most successful companies have sold out to multinationals; we have not been able to grow them ourselves. An interesting fact is that, although we have 10 per cent of the UK industry, we have 25 per cent of the gaming companies in the UK. We have lots of start-ups, but they are not large enough. They are still too small and need nurtured. Difficulties in bank borrowing have particularly hit the industry. It is not a traditional industry and does not have traditional businesspeople—cultural people are not traditionally au fait with business skills. It also suffers from the fact that, as all small businessmen know, the Royal Bank of Scotland and the Lloyds Banking Group dominance in the marketplace in Scotland makes it difficult to borrow the relatively small amounts that some of those one-man or two-person businesses need. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government’s creative industries strategy has improved access to finance as a key objective, but we must go further. Other countries have overtaken not only Scotland, but the whole UK in the games industry. Canada, France and parts of the United States are offering tax relief to the sector and, within Canada, Montreal has witnessed a phenomenal growth in multimedia industries. Other countries have picked that up. The Irish culture minister recently announced that he intends to thoroughly investigate the benefits that could come from a games sector tax relief. The UK-wide industry body TIGA—the Independent Games Developers Association Ltd—has lobbied for a long time for tax incentives. The Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives supported TIGA’s position before the 2010 general election but abandoned that support shortly afterwards. Westminster has come up with some changes to the landscape that affect the digital media economy, but they do not address the unique challenges that Scottish companies face. For example, the Westminster Government created an industry hub in London, which is not really where the help was needed, and introduced tax relief on research and development to boost innovation. However, it refused to introduce the kind of tax relief that the film industry enjoys. Although tax relief on R and D and innovation is welcome, Scotland’s biggest challenge is not innovation. We have the ideas and the developers; we just need the incentives that allow the developers to grow. We need to take matters into our own hands. A recent survey for PricewaterhouseCoopers showed that the computer games industry will be worth £86.8 billion in three years’ time. Scotland is well placed to take advantage of that, but we need the fiscal levers to assist our companies to reach the next level.

6. To ask the Scottish Government how many jobs have been created in Dumfries and Galloway and what other economic benefits have arisen as a result of the University of Glasgow’s Crichton campus since 2007. (S4O-00037)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that the threat to the liberal arts subjects at the Crichton is of great concern, given the economic contribution of the campus to the area—which he has described—and given the importance of the creative industries in particular to the economy of Dumfries and Galloway?

I draw members’ attention to my entry in the register of members’ interests, which shows that I have a background in the media, that I receive continuing remuneration from the print media and that I am participating in a programme for STV this autumn. It is encouraging to have such consensus across the chamber on the issue. In particular, there has been a lot of consensus on making network programmes from Scotland and the progress that has been made on that. Several members have referred to the fact that the number of network TV hours that are made by BBC Scotland has increased by 150 per cent in two years. The briefing from BBC Scotland suggests that it is on target to meet the 8.6 per cent minimum provision by 2016, which is good from an economic point of view, as it will bring technical and production jobs to Scotland and build capacity. However, I sound a note of caution on that subject. Through speaking to prominent journalists in our broadcasting institutions in Scotland, I know that they are concerned about the emphasis on making programmes for the network. Many of the shows do not contribute particularly to our culture and there is a feeling that many of them are box-ticking exercises.

I have not seen the show, but I have heard that it is an excellent piece of programming. I certainly would not include it in my comments, but we have made shows here that do not necessarily fulfil the remit of addressing our needs in Scotland. For example, when “Question Time” moves up here, David Dimbleby will remain ensconced in London. Broadcasting is not about the number of widgets that are produced from a particular cost centre; it is about reflecting the richness of our culture. The broadcast media are just as important as literature, painting and theatre and provide the culture with which most people in the country engage. Broadcasting is hugely important for our national life, for scrutinising our democratic institutions, for offering a forum for debate and for promoting understanding of our country. I draw members’ attention to research that has been uncovered by former BBC journalist Kenneth Roy, which shows that the amount of English-language programming that is made in Scotland and is about Scotland has fallen in the past few years. In 2004, £72 million was spent on such programming, but by 2009 the figure was £50 million. It is fantastic that we are building up technical capacity by making shows such as “The Weakest Link”, “The Old Guys” and “The National Lottery: Secret Fortune”, but that is a real problem if it is done at the expense of programmes that address important issues in our culture. I am not knocking the BBC—I happen to think that the BBC is a fine institution that produces fantastic quality and breadth. Nationally, the BBC has a huge range of news and current affairs platforms. We have highbrow programmes such as “Today” and “Newsnight” and we have Radio 5 live and youth programmes such as “Newsbeat”, all of which are excellent. However, they do not have capacity to address Scottish news and current affairs, and I am not sure that it is reasonable for us to expect them to do that, because 90 per cent of the people who watch and listen to those programmes are in other areas of the UK. Although they might be interested in what happens in the chamber from time to time, they are not going to demand the level of detail that people in Scotland would. That is why it is important that we focus on improving the quality of programmes made in Scotland for Scots, and I am hopeful that the Scottish digital network will do that. This is by way of illustration. We have just been through an election campaign and, as a member of the winning party, I perhaps should not complain about the coverage that we got. However, it was disgraceful that BBC Scotland, as the public service broadcaster, managed to do only one leaders’ debate that was broadcast late at night, whereas STV, which is not subsidised to the same extent, managed two at prime time. During the general election last year, there was a huge lead-up to the leaders’ debate, which engaged people in the democratic process.

That is wrong: we were excluded from those debates. I could say a great deal about those debates, which completely ignored Scotland and in which we were not able to engage in talking about Scottish issues, but that is another subject entirely. The fact is that we do not have a public service broadcaster that allows us properly to scrutinise events in this chamber, which should concern members on all sides. We might have good coverage on “Newsnight Scotland” and for people who are particularly concerned about politics—the political anoraks, if you like. However, when it comes to popular television and engagement, which the BBC does very well nationally through Radio 5 live and “Newsbeat”, we just do not do that for Scottish issues. I hope that the Scottish digital network will address that. However, I sound a note of caution: the digital network should not let our current public service broadcasters off the hook on this matter.

I congratulate Graeme Pearson on his election and his maiden speech. I am sure that he will make the same robust contribution to this chamber as he has made to the world of fighting crime. I intend to take a slightly different tone with my maiden speech, however. Five minutes after I was elected, one of my journalistic colleagues asked whether I was going to be a poacher turned gamekeeper. Of course, I completely denied the accusation, but what I have to say may vindicate that journalist, because I intend to break with the tradition of newspaper columnists by complimenting politicians on all sides. I will consider what the First Minister said today about devolving Crown estate administration to Scotland and show how that is a continuation of some of this Parliament’s achievements. In the long campaign to have this Parliament established in 1999, one argument was persuasive to unionists as well as to people from my own party. There was general agreement that large areas of Scotland’s governance were neglected, not out of malice or avarice—although some of us did think that—but simply because the UK Parliament did not have time to scrutinise and reform areas of Scottish life that were stuck in the past. One of those areas was land reform. Although feudalism was abolished elsewhere in Europe centuries ago, in Scotland we were still in the grip of a system that sounded as though it came from the days of Robin Hood, with vassals, sub-vassals, superiorities and burdens. While that sounds comic, it was not funny for those who faced arbitrary charges from absent overlords. I therefore pay tribute to the Labour and Liberal Democrat Administrations that passed—albeit with Scottish National Party support—the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000. It is to the credit of those previous Administrations that they did not stop at abolishing feudalism, but went on to pass progressive land reform legislation. We now have public rights of access and provision for community ownership as a result. In Scotland, the ground beneath our feet is more than a mere commodity: it is part of who we are. To put it in the words of the old rousing crofting anthem beloved of Highland Liberals: “The land, the land, ’Twas God who made the land” —and so too with the sea. Most Scots find it offensive that the shoreline or the sea bed could be bought and sold, and they are quite right: it cannot be bought and sold. There is a lot of misunderstanding about that issue on all sides of the chamber. Our shoreline and continental shelf out to the 200-mile limit are public land. They are part of what is called the Crown estate, but that title is misleading and archaic. The Crown estate does not belong to the Queen or any other private individual or organisation: it is public land that falls within the jurisdiction of this Parliament and is subject to Scots law. That assertion does not come from me or the SNP Government: it is the conclusion of the Treasury Select Committee at Westminster, which it reached last year after a lengthy inquiry. However, by some quirk of history that precious public asset is administered by an unaccountable organisation that calls itself the Crown Estate Commissioners. It is an archaic quango that is based in London’s Belgravia, and it hoovers up the resources from our shores and seas and gives nothing in return. When the First Minister asserts our rights to the Crown estate, he is not asking for the land: we, the people, already own the land. He is asking that its administration and revenues be transferred back to Scotland, as was the case until 1832. Many of us of different political persuasions already agree on that. It is not often that you hear someone from the SNP sing the praises of the former Labour minister at Westminster, Brian Wilson MP, but he has been a stalwart campaigner on the Crown estate since the 1970s. He recently wrote in the Aberdeen Press and Journal that he first became interested when the Crown Estate decided to lease sea lochs to multinational salmon companies in the west of Scotland without consulting anyone, not least the affected communities. He said: “Quite literally, people whose families had lived and worked in these places for generations woke up to find that the entire rights to use of a loch had been flogged off”. Brian Wilson wants the administration of the Crown estate to be devolved to this Parliament, and so do many Highland Liberals—those that are left. In 2006 no fewer than five Highland Liberal Democrat MPs introduced a Westminster bill that called for the management of the Crown estate to be transferred to the Scottish Parliament. They included one Danny Alexander, who I understand now has some influence in another place. My favourite quote on the matter is from the member for Shetland, Tavish Scott—it is a shame that he is not here to hear it—who went into battle against the Crown Estate in 2007. He said: “They tax our aquaculture industry ... our harbours and marinas”, and that it is unacceptable. He went on to say: “And, with marine renewable projects in the offing, they will ... tax the wave and tidal power developments and the cables which bring the power ashore.” Mr Scott showed considerable foresight when he made those remarks back in 2007 because renewables hold the key to prosperity in our country for not just the coastal communities that gain revenue from direct access to the royalties, but Scotland’s cities and urban areas, which will benefit from the manufacturing jobs that, as Iain Gray mentioned earlier, are forecast to come in this sector. However, we need the powers to develop renewables as well as a democratically accountable body in charge of planning, not some unaccountable body based in Belgravia. I appeal to all sides of the chamber to recognise that the First Minister’s call for devolution of Crown estate management is no radical break; it is actually a continuation of the Parliament’s previous achievements. This is not just a financial issue—it is a moral imperative. This Parliament has, from the outset, paid attention to Scotland. For example, after centuries of stalemate, it abolished feudalism inside two years. Let us hold true to our record and rid Scotland of this relic of the past and impediment to our progress, the Crown Estate Commissioners, and remember instead the crofter’s clarion call that “the land, the land”—and the foreshore—belong to the people of Scotland.