I am grateful to the minister for outlining the understanding that the Government has developed in relation to new psychoactive substances. I also acknowledge the contribution thus far from members and their understanding of the challenge that we face, in particular Graeme Dey, who has outlined some understanding of the technical difficulties that lie beyond the initial challenge. The problem was outlined and responded to earlier: 47 families in Scotland suffered a death in 2012 as a direct consequence of the use of new psychoactive substances. Lying behind each of those deaths is an international challenge, because many of the chemicals that are involved in new psychoactive substances are sourced in bulk from China and India. No legal framework is available to control the development of new psychoactive substances outcomes, as the chemists involved gradually change the formula that lies behind the chemicals, thereby extending their reach outwith criminality. There is a supply chain for class A drugs that is currently used across Europe to deliver new psychoactive substances into the European market. The Netherlands, Belgium and Turkey play a major part as a nexus for that supply chain. Importantly, from the point of view of those who sell new psychoactive substances this is profit largely without jail and this is profit largely without tax. This is a business that has developed with an amoral approach: although they know full well that those who purchase new psychoactive substances are taking a chance and consuming dangerous drugs, the sellers pretend to all and sundry that the products are not for human consumption. They are kidding no one with that approach, but in the absence of an ability to carry out presumptive tests on all the substances that are available, it is difficult for the authorities to maintain a current understanding of the challenge. Often, as was referred to earlier, class A drugs are found within the legal high supply. Those legal highs, as they are called by young people, can have a higher strength impact than the class A drug that they seek to replace. The stimulant MDPV, which appeared for the first time in 2008, has been responsible for 100 known deaths across Europe since then and hundreds of incidents in various countries across the world, so it is a problem that affects more than Scotland. A pattern is developing. The drug is created, introduced to the market and promoted largely on the internet. People consume the drug and its fame is transferred by word by mouth. It is viewed by the authorities and, once it is discovered, it is tested and becomes regulated and the content is made illegal. As a result, the use of the drug falls significantly but, by that time, the chemist has moved on. We have had the experience of BZP, GBL and other drugs that have gone through that process. Such drugs have been sold as fish food or plant food not for human consumption, and yet their role on the internet is well understood. What should we do? What do we need to understand in taking things forward? Many aspects have already been covered in earlier speeches. We need to connect our statistical analysis to the database that is maintained by the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction. Statistics held there in relation to Scotland and the UK are poor in the extreme. We should be updating the centre with our information and receiving information about the trends that it identifies. We should initiate more testing of recoveries in order to identify new substances as they come on to the market. For those substances that are recovered without engagement with an accused, it is important that we identify the detail of what they contain. Education has been mentioned, and it is clear that young people and their parents have not been educated about the impact of so-called legal highs in our communities. To some extent we have lost ground, as legal highs are well understood by teenagers who react to the sales of such substances in their own communities. We should engage with HM Revenue and Customs. The people who sell these substances are making substantial profits, and we are entitled to know whether those profits are being declared. If they are not, HMRC should pay attention. That would put pressure on the sales, and we could achieve the desired outcome by a different method. Members have mentioned trading standards, for which product safety is an issue, and it is clear that they should become involved. We should monitor imminent European legislation that may assist us in dealing with the new psychoactive challenge. Ireland introduced legislation in 2010 to attack the use of psychoactive substances and their effects. However, the problem is that, once a case arrives at court, it becomes very challenging to produce a prosecution. As the minister indicated, the evidence from New Zealand is in its early days, but it does not look particularly promising in terms of taking us forward to a solution. Our young people need to know that these drugs are dangerous and should be avoided. We should encourage parents to ensure that our younger generations avoid new psychoactive substances at all costs.

The cabinet secretary indicated that support staff in the fire service are being retrained. Is he not struck by the fact that so many staff have been kept in the dark right until the last minute, and have been offered no counselling on alternative retraining? The controversy that has been created is so passionate that it is time that the cabinet secretary spoke to Mr Emery and asked for some consideration of staff needs.

I offer my sincere thanks to three separate entities. First, I thank Barnardo’s for bringing forward the evidence that lay behind the petition, which resulted in the report that we are debating. Secondly, I thank Aberlour Child Care Trust and all the other groups that are involved, long term, in dealing with the problem of child sexual exploitation. I mention Aberlour in particular because I, like the member who commented on the matter earlier, regret the decision that was taken in 2013 to withdraw funding for the one refuge in Scotland that might have helped children who have suffered exploitation. I am therefore pleased that the minister said that the situation will be re-examined; I look forward to the outcome of that. Thirdly, I acknowledge the work of the Public Petitions Committee, which undertook a challenging investigation into a subject that is of great importance to the future of Scotland and our young people. I think that the committee’s report deals sensitively with the issues. Only this morning, I received a telephone call from a constituent who did not know that this debate was to take place today but who has brought to my attention issues that, for the past few months, I have been attempting to deal with—issues that are the result of a period of betrayal that he suffered as a child. He should have been cared for and protected but instead he suffered sexual exploitation. Many decades later, he is still dealing with the pain, regret and isolation that have come from that experience. I will not go into the detail of my constituent’s case, but I think that it mirrors the experience of many children and adults in our community, who must deal with such experiences day in and day out, often with little chance of escape or with insufficient support. In that context, I remind members and the minister of the main inquiry objectives: to identify the nature and extent of child sexual exploitation in Scotland—a matter that we should continue to pay attention to and work on; to identify the most pertinent issues that need to be tackled in a changing scene that needs to be addressed year by year; and to continue to make recommendations on how to improve the effectiveness of our services. Scottish studies are few and far between. The sheer extent and the nature of the subject matter are little known to us, and much is guessed at on the basis of the work and efforts of those engaged in this area of activity. I have no doubt that in her closing speech the minister will acknowledge the need for more research in the area as well as the need to understand clearly the beginnings of exploitation and how it develops in a country such as Scotland. At a UK level, the child exploitation and online protection centre has engaged in some research, although it is acknowledged to be very limited. However, even that UK-wide study, into which Scottish police forces have fed, acknowledged that nearly 5,500 reports of the exploitation of children were received in 2008-09, with the figure rising a year later to 6,291 reports. We are perhaps at an advantage, in that CEOP’s new head is Johnny Gwynne who, as a former police officer from Scotland, will have an interest in what happens here. I have no doubt that he will be supported by Gordon Meldrum and Bob Lauder, both former members of the Scottish police service, who operate at a high level in the National Crime Agency. CEOP’s report also acknowledges that 27 per cent of girls reported that they had been forced or pressurised to engage in sexual activity against their wishes. That is a real problem for girls in our community that needs to be addressed urgently. We know who will be in some of the high-risk groups. They come from families who are facing difficulties and where neglect, abuse and domestic violence are part of daily life. They also include those who are in our care system. Unfortunately, we know that children in care systems across the United Kingdom, where the management of the care environment is not disciplined and effective, can be abused, either by their peer group in the care home or occasionally by those who are given the duty of looking after them. We recognise that we need to address that on-going problem. Those who seek to exploit children will also seek out the posts that make that exploitation so much easier. I hope that the minister, in taking the matter forward, will pay some attention to that element of the problem that we face. Indeed, she has indicated that an action plan or national strategy is vital in progressing the issue. Not a great deal has been said so far about the internet and the use of chat rooms. Recent reports show that more than 10,000 children in the far east are exploited by adults who live and conduct their business here—

I will, if the Presiding Officer is happy for me to do so.

I thank the minister for that intervention and I am happy to acknowledge her point. The use of chat rooms to choreograph the exploitation of children is a new development and indicates how quickly the scene moves. We need to pay attention to that. Finally, I acknowledge that there is not a lot in the report about prison policy and what we should do with those who reoffend and are in our custody to persuade them to avoid reoffending in the future.

I am grateful to members who have shared their knowledge on the subject but, like Nanette Milne, I, too, am not content that we need to discuss this issue and recognise that we do so with great sadness. It would be far better if we as a nation did not have to face the on-going experience of suicide as has been described. In that sense, we face a tremendous battle. It has been alluded to that we have faced nearly 4,000 such deaths in Scotland over the past five years. I am sure that each of those deaths has left behind heartbreak and a legacy for those who have been involved. In that context, I welcome what the minister said and the strategy that has been outlined in “Suicide Prevention Strategy 2013-2016”. The introduction to “Suicide Prevention Strategy 2013-2016” lays out definitions of self-harm, suicidal behaviour and suicide. Members’ experiences and observations identify that among the priorities that we face is focusing on the early signs of behaviours that could eventually lead to suicide or an attempt at suicide. Those who have engaged in self-harm and suicidal behaviour deserve our support at an early stage, and there should be early intervention of some value if we are to go further in reducing the suicide rate. I think that we all accept that it is not only suicides themselves who are the focus of our concerns. Around every such event, families and friends are left to question how it occurred, and our society is left bereft of the contribution that could otherwise have been made. Indeed, in many circumstances, witnesses are left behind devastated by the experience. Many statistics have rightly been mentioned. Almost every day somewhere in the United Kingdom, someone steps on to a railway line and commits suicide. That has an obvious impact on not only their family and friends but the poor train driver who was in the train on that date. The ramifications of each of those circumstances are severe and for all of us to consider. Some of us who had no knowledge of those circumstances earlier in life often heard that the act was selfish and required more consideration. Suicide leaves behind chaos, guilt—we heard about that earlier—in families that feel that they have some responsibility in some way, and a notion of blame needing to be asserted. Thankfully, we have, I think, come to understand that the whole circumstance is based essentially on illness, pressure and an inability to see a way forward. For many, that is not understandable, but nevertheless it is so prevalent that we can come to know that human beings can feel that the only way forward is to take their own life. I do not think that we can too often consider and try to respond to the sadness and impact of that. On the circumstances that lie behind suicide, there is, no doubt, as Willie Coffey mentioned earlier, a propensity in Scotland to commit suicide, particularly among males, that is not seen elsewhere in western Europe. Obviously, alcohol and substance abuse have some impact. We are all aware of the levels of alcohol and substance abuse in Scotland. Joblessness and poverty have been mentioned, and bad debt is a factor. Hopelessness and sometimes homelessness lie behind suicide. Our thanks are no doubt due to NHS Scotland, the Samaritans, Breathing Space, the Salvation Army and many third sector groups that work tirelessly in that regard. For the future, education is obviously of great significance in the strategy when it comes to understanding some of the early signs and recognising the pressures that individuals face. Talking about the issues and getting things out there into the public domain are increasingly important. Knowledge in the workplace is also important, because signs can be seen there. Workers should be educated to know that colleagues are under pressure; steps can then be taken. The issue is very sensitive. Signs can be misread, but it is far better to take steps to help each other than to step aside and say in the Scottish way, “Let’s not be nosey about our pals’ interests or our neighbours’ futures.” We should step in and at least show kindness and an interest. Also, social events in Scotland such as football matches, where male sensitivities are put aside, and pop concerts and the like are places to advertise the fact that there is a problem, which is almost unspoken until one experiences it at first hand. Identification is an important issue. Equally important, as has been alluded to, are the real-time responses. I, too, listened to the radio this morning, and it became self-evident that when people need help they need it immediately and they need someone to speak to. Although the Samaritans are a great support, more needs to be done in that regard. I am sure that the minister will give thought to that. Mention has been made of the use of sport and recreation to get people out into the open air and involved in groups. Although that is not part of an NHS strategy, one hopes that the minister can give us some insight into the co-operative work that is going on in the partnerships that we always talk about to deliver alternative solutions to our problems. Monitoring and constant reassessment of the strategy will be significant in the years ahead. I am pleased to hear that there is no complacency regarding the falls in numbers and that they are not, in themselves, being seen as the achievement of success. One life saved is something that we should laud and be pleased about, but we want to try to save all these lives for the future. In that context, I welcome the 11 commitments that are outlined in the document and encourage the minister to do more as the evidence presents itself.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what support it is providing to communities in East Ayrshire. (S4O-02804)

Is the minister able to share with me the actions that the Government-appointed task force has decided to take to ameliorate the worst outcomes of the opencast mines debacle that is affecting East Ayrshire communities and which is likely to cost them more than £100 million to repair?

I congratulate my colleague Paul Martin on enabling this debate on a serious issue: the ownership of dogs and the damage that can be done by dogs that turn out to be dangerous. The Broagan McCuaig situation yet again highlighted the circumstances in which young people, in particular, can suffer the most awful experience at the hands of an out-of-control dog. As all members know, daily, there are dozens of incidents involving dogs and, each year, incidents occur that result in serious injury or mishap. Dogs can bite, attack or frighten people. They can be used to provide security for criminals or to deliver a form of intimidation in neighbourhoods or estates. On occasion, dogs attack postal workers or other public service providers in our community. A side issue that we often forget is that dogs also foul public places, which concerns parents, who are worried about their children in public areas. The whole area is a nightmare in terms of our experience and otherwise, but the context is that there is no doubt that we are a nation of dog lovers. I have owned dogs and enjoyed every moment of that ownership—thankfully, the dogs that were under my control were not involved in any such incidents. However, we need to take cognisance of the matters that my colleagues Paul Martin and Christine Grahame have raised. No matter the amount of legislation that has been introduced, we still face monthly the problems of people being attacked and seriously injured, and we need to try to find some means of dealing with the threats. I welcome the beginning of a consultation process. I hope that, on the back of that process, an expert group can be brought together to act with some speed to consider the consultation and, on the basis of evidence, to consider the way forward and make recommendations. There is significant public concern about the issue. The group should consider licensing and the opportunity to train owners to ensure that they are fit and proper people to have dogs under their control. There is no doubt that the danger comes not from dogs per se but from a lack of good ownership and proper control of dogs by human beings. The issue is about people accepting their responsibility. Microchipping is an important issue. If we know where a dog has come from, we can identify who the owners should be and who should have maintained control. Other issues that the group should analyse are the use of leads in public areas to properly control dogs and the use of muzzles. Muzzles are controversial, and it has been suggested that they can cause more aggression rather than reduce it, but we need to get good advice in that regard. Consideration should be given to the proper enforcement by housing associations of the conditions that apply to tenants with regard to dogs. We should also look at ridding our communities of stray dogs, the numbers of which are of much concern. Thankfully, stray dogs are not often involved in the sort of terrible circumstances that have been described, but they add to the problems and the threats that our communities face. I am delighted that my colleague introduced the debate and I am pleased to have taken part in it.

I acknowledge the minister’s point about the absent member, who was a tower of strength in my time on the Justice Committee. On occasions, he was a good shield when our convener got out of hand. Our convener mentioned that this is a dry topic. My experience in two years as a member of the Justice Committee was that we visited many a dry topic. There is no doubt that, when I received the paperwork for the inquiry, I did not look forward to an exciting time. However, it was on occasions an exciting time, as witnesses expressed diametrically opposed views on whether the subject was being properly or badly covered. The inquiry did not represent the first time that the convener had led me astray on such matters and got me involved in complex issues that are difficult to deal with. Nevertheless, I feel a better person for having gone through the experience. I have no doubt that I will cope with such challenges much better in the future. I thank the committee clerks, the people who gave evidence to enlighten the committee about the challenges that are faced and the officials who supported the committee’s work. The Title Conditions (Scotland) Act 2003 was a key part of the Parliament’s reform agenda for land ownership in Scotland, alongside elements that included the Abolition of Feudal Tenure etc (Scotland) Act 2000 and the Tenements (Scotland) Act 2004. The 2003 act updated the law on obligations—title conditions—as they appear in title deeds that pass ownership of land and buildings. As well as binding original buyers, title conditions bind future buyers, so they create perpetual obligations that run with the land. That is the nub of many of the issues that caused conflict as we listened to witnesses, who seemed to be ignorant of the fact that such obligations passed to them or to much prefer the notion that the obligations never existed in the first place. The inquiry into the 2003 act had four main elements. We sought views on whether the act creates a barrier to switching property factors and on whether it offers sufficient recourse for people who are dissatisfied with the services of land-owning maintenance companies. We sought experiences of the options that are available under the act to vary or remove existing real burdens. We also considered the practical operation of section 53, as we have heard. We made many recommendations, which covered a host of elements of our debate. I will not repeat much of what has been said about that. It became apparent that, as much as the factors issue that our convener outlined caused concern, particularly in tenemental property, a great deal of emotion and heat was created when we discussed those who are involved in land management companies and the impact of those companies’ work on estates and new housing partnerships. That conflict involves a number of elements, one of which is the contract that is deemed to exist between occupants of homes and the companies that provide services in the area, including green space services. Another issue is the ability of tenants or home owners to vary their relationship with service providers. It is fair to say that there was a quandary about whether the services are provided at an economically viable rate and about the quality of service delivery. There was no way of resolving that satisfactorily in debate in the committee. The recommendations, which our convener outlined and to which the minister has responded, offer a way forward in a difficult set of circumstances. I look forward to colleagues contributing to the elements of the debate.

The debate has been a useful exercise in revisiting the decisions that were made by an earlier Parliament about what has proved to be a complex area of relationships. Two points arise from our discussion this afternoon. First, the maintenance of property—houses and flats—and the environment around those houses and flats is critical if one is to maintain the quality of living that we would hope for in Scotland. The committee acknowledged that solicitors have a part to play in ensuring that those who become owners of property are aware of their responsibilities in that regard and understand the implications that arise from those responsibilities. The Law Society acknowledged that it has a duty in that regard and indicated that it delivers that advice. However, from the evidence that the committee heard, there is little doubt that owners seem vague about whether that information has been passed to them. At the very least, therefore, there is an issue with the communications that are received and understood by clients at the important time of purchase and sale. Secondly, it is fair to say that both factors and land maintenance companies provide an important service and expect—and probably require, in business terms—stability in the relationship. However, the committee heard in evidence—and we have heard from various members this afternoon—that there seems to be, at the very least, an absence of trust in the relationship between property owners and those companies that deliver a service. In that context, the recommendations on transparency in the costs of services, the quality of service that can be expected and the timescales that apply to the delivery of that service are vital. Some members have commented on the apparent inability of companies to understand the needs of property owners, and that is part of the problem that we dealt with during our committee discussions. The committee spent a great deal of time in gaining an understanding of the issues around land maintenance companies and their fees. Collectively, as was seen during our discussions, we came to understand that there is a real need for tenants or owner associations to deal with those issues. The fact that two eminent academics disagreed so obviously in front of us was not only juicy and much enjoyed, but reflected the fact that there is a need for the Scottish Law Commission to have a look at how section 53 relates to the circumstances. Its advice on that would be much welcomed. The Government’s moves to issue guidance on this whole area of activity and the way in which data can be transferred between the various owners are welcomed. Nevertheless, I proffer to the minister that, as well as guidance, continuing and obvious commitment from Government to oversee the circumstances that we have discussed this afternoon and a commitment to deliver will be significant in leading the way forward in the future.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to increase the provision and uptake of Cantonese and Mandarin in schools. (S4O-02748)

The minister will understand how important it is that our young people in Scotland have a knowledge and understanding of Mandarin and Cantonese. How will he encourage Scottish children to take the languages to advanced level and how will he increase the number who do so?

Over the festive period, I was in New Cumnock with local councillors, particularly at Millar Road, which was very badly affected by the flood, and can confirm the minister’s view that the efforts of the police, the fire service, the local authority and utility services were deeply satisfactory, as far as they were concerned. However, a point was raised about the accumulation of silt in the nearby River Afton. There was an indication that it was believed locally that that was the result of a policy that is supported by SEPA. Is that policy in fact in place? Should it be reconsidered, given that the water that was displaced by that silt affected the local community?

Sandra White makes accurate points. Concerns have also been raised about the capacity of the forensic science fingerprints bureau to provide adequate levels of support in the examination of scenes of housebreakings throughout Scotland, given the substantial backlogs of work and court preparation. Will the cabinet secretary have a look at that situation and ensure that the correct support is being provided for housebreaking examinations?

I rise to indicate my support for the motion in the name of Shona Robison and the amendment in the name of Jackie Baillie. I note that Sandra White took some exception to Labour’s amendment and I like to think that she has misunderstood its nature. The amendment seeks to indicate an absence of complacency on our part about the current situation rather than imply criticism of on-going commitments.

I do not have enough time. I apologise to the member, but I have a lot to get through. As I listened to the debate, I became aware again of the zero tolerance campaign from the 1970s. I was reminded of the shock and controversy that that campaign created as people struggled to understand who was being accused and what they were being accused of. That was probably the beginning of the realisation that men are the problem in this context and that, as was indicated by Alison McInnes, it is the habit of men to seek the abuse of power. Nearly 40 years ago, I attended a course in the Federal Bureau of Investigation academy, where it was indicated to me that sex crime was nothing to do with sexual relationships but was an abuse of power and control by men, largely over women. In that regard, we have come a long way and many people now understand the nature of that abuse. Today’s debate has indicated that this is not only a crime issue. It is an issue of health in our communities; of our work life and our relationships in work; of the media and the way in which it reports on what we do in our communities; of the still continuous use of page 3; of the music business and the way in which it uses women as a commodity for selling music and fashion; of the way in which schools operate and the value that is placed on the part that women play in education; of the value that we place on women’s involvement in sport; and of how we value work in a financial sense and the way in which we pay people who are engaged in work. There was some controversy about the story that Rhoda Grant told. I like to think that that is frustration and anger here in the chamber about the reality of what is happening out there in the street. I have never met a woman engaged in what we describe as an industry—the sex industry—who wilfully, wantonly and willingly sold her body to a man in some cold, bleak place, in some loveless relationship. We need to face that fact and begin to come to terms with it. I would not want any woman in my family to engage in that kind of industry—if it is to be called that. Where does that take us? It takes us to more than 60,000 reported incidents of domestic violence throughout Scotland. In 10 years, that number has doubled. We could ask whether that is because there are greater levels of confidence in the system to deal with it. However, the numbers continue to rise, which should give us concern. Each year, nearly 50 per cent of murders take place in a domestic relationship and one in four women experiences domestic abuse. Those numbers are frightening from any perspective—frightening that we now know about it and frightening that we need to be seen to do something about it for the future. If we do not, a modern Scotland is meaningless in real terms.

As the member knows, the Justice Committee is still taking evidence on that. From the outset, I have indicated that I want to hear all the evidence first. It has been fairly well rehearsed in this debate that this is not solely about what happens in a court. Changing cultures and attitudes in the street, in our schools, in our homes and in our families is what will make the difference, rather than how many people we do or do not prosecute. As members throughout the chamber have indicated, support services need to be properly resourced and co-ordinated. Members have mentioned the role of COSLA in bringing together that co-ordination and playing a part in that national strategy. As has been indicated, the courts have a lot to do. Our domestic violence courts were supposed to deliver within six weeks. It is now 40 weeks or more before they can deliver. Families in that situation cannot wait for 40 weeks for some kind of respite and solution. Corporate responses are important. Nothing has been said about our prisons and the part that they can play in educating those in their custody about gender issues, equality, attitudes and criminality. Equally, one would hope that, in the feedback to the consultation process, we get some profitable views on what we should do about the media and the way in which women are being marketed in our communities.

I commend Kezia Dugdale for securing the debate and the members of the debtbusters campaign, who have continued to keep the country focused on the issue. I also commend the citizens advice bureaux, which are at the forefront of supporting and advising those who are affected. As has been mentioned, earlier this month, Ofcom reported on the rise of the adverts that promote payday loans. It indicated that our children watch 70 payday loan adverts on television each year, and stated that research has revealed that in the past four years there has been a 2,235 per cent increase in the number of payday loan adverts on television. Each adult saw an average of 152 payday loan adverts in 2012. Martin Lewis, the consumer champion who founded moneysavingexpert.com, indicated that the statistics proved that payday lenders are grooming the next generation of customers to see as normal an extremely abnormal form of lending. It has been said that the industry charges interest of up to 5,000 per cent annual percentage rate. We are talking about an industry that creates a millstone to put around the necks of many families who find it difficult, and sometimes impossible, to escape. In 2013, the OFT focused on 50 leading lenders and gave them 60 days to rectify shortcomings, including the failure to properly assess risk and the ability of customers to pay, aggressive debt recovery plans and the lack of proper explanation of the customer’s responsibility for repayments. From April next year, the FCA will provide a form of oversight, and I hope that we will see a more aggressive reflection of how the industry should be viewed. The whole environment reflects a Gordon Gekko approach to financial provision in which greed is good. For some in our communities, a payday loan might be a short-term solution to consumer need, but for many it is a burden, a yoke or a slippery slope leading to fear, stress and family disharmony. What can we ask the Scottish Government to do? It could mount an education campaign, promoting the downside to involvement in the industry. It could also encourage the FCA on licensing criteria and promote support for credit unions and ethical banks that seek to provide appropriate credit for people who need it.

I acknowledge and support amendment 28, in the name of Margaret Mitchell. Throughout the evidence that we heard in the Justice Committee, it became apparent that there were two worlds out there. One of those was the world of victims, who came to speak to the committee in a deeply moving fashion about how they perceived the services that were provided to them as they made their journey through the justice system. I do not think there will be a member here in the chamber who has not spoken to a witness or victim who has echoed the opinions that were given during the evidence that we heard in the committee. That situation demands that we offer a response. Amendment 28 would push services in that direction by requiring the co-ordination of support and the provision of a single point of contact. The Labour Party had at one stage suggested that a commissioner would be one way to deliver on that, but it soon became apparent that there was no appetite for such a post. However, having a single point of contact or a case companion—whatever nomenclature one would want to use—would be a significant improvement on current arrangements. Victims indicated to us that they felt like a parcel being passed through the system. Without taking up too much time in this debate, I will tell members about a lady who travelled from the north-east of Scotland to meet me yesterday, because she knew of this debate. She gave me a letter that she had sent to the authorities. It said: “I was disappointed with the response as it did not address the issues I raised in my letter ... The vagaries of the criminal justice system are unbelievably difficult to understand for victims whose loved one has died as a result of a criminal act ... I also found it particularly galling to read about the prisoner’s rehabilitation and the support available to her”. She wanted the needs of victims to be addressed. Amendment 28 goes a long way towards dealing with those issues. Amendment 21 would ensure that those who receive the information in respect of a release have intimated that they want that information passed to them, and that they receive that intimation in a reasonable form. Often, they receive an official letter that is written in language that is difficult to understand. Amendment 24 concerns guidance and provision of information to victims in court proceedings in solemn cases. Victims and witnesses are still going to our courts and being led into a situation with no guidance or support. That leads to them not understanding what is happening and, often, confronting the very accused who they are there to deal with. I commend the amendments.

The group of amendments arises from significant concerns that were expressed by Rape Crisis Scotland, Scottish Women’s Aid, domestic abuse groups and other associated women’s groups about the application of existing legislation that was designed to ensure that sensitive personal information is disclosed as part of court procedures only in relevant cases, and that it is handled sensitively. The experience of victims as recorded in evidence to the Justice Committee and the lobbying from those groups indicate that the legislation is not being applied effectively. Subsection (1) of the new section that amendment 12 would insert says that “The Lord Advocate must prepare and publish guidance on the circumstances in which sensitive personal information” about a victim can be used in the public court process. The other subsections in the proposed new section refer to the means by which such guidance could be prepared, produced and disseminated. In the event that amendment 12 fails, I will support Margaret Mitchell’s amendment 29, which takes a different approach to a similar problem. It seeks the provision of legal advice to victims so that necessary processes can be put in place to protect the interests of the victim in the system. Margaret Mitchell’s accompanying amendments set out the means by which that could be delivered, and I have no comment to offer on them. I move amendment 12.

I take the hint, Presiding Officer. I am sorry to disappoint the cabinet secretary, but I will not seek agreement to withdraw amendment 12. In summation, all the words that he has just given us mean no change for women who go through our courts. The bill is largely driven by European legislation, which demands different approaches in member countries. Hence we have the proposals in the bill, but the issue has not been looked at from the point of view of victims. I hope that members will consider the issue, which has been at the centre of a problem in our courts for 10 years. We need to move now.

The current arrangements for making a victim’s feelings known to a hearing is that they can supply a written statement, or they can be interviewed and can give an oral statement to a third party, who will then pass on that information for consideration. Amendment 17 seeks to offer a victim or a nominated person the right to make an oral representation—to be heard first hand. There is no doubt that victims who offered evidence to the committee and elsewhere have indicated that they wish to be able to make an oral representation on behalf of themselves and their family. I see no reason why the amendment cannot be agreed to. It would be good to allow victims to be heard and the amendment would have an impact on the processes that are being considered. I hope that members will feel able to support it. I move amendment 17.

In good faith, and given the cabinet secretary’s assurances, I seek leave to withdraw the amendment. Amendment 17, by agreement, withdrawn.

Amendments 22 and 23 are similar to an approach that I suggested in an amendment that related to oral representations in court. The evidence that was presented during the processes in the Justice Committee indicated that victims and victims’ relatives felt disenfranchised by the process of criminal justice and that their voices were not heard at key moments in that process. Amendment 22 would give victims the opportunity to make an oral representation to a board considering the release of someone who had previously been sentenced to life imprisonment. The amendment would have an impact on a discrete number of prisoners. It was suggested that allowing victims or their relatives to make such representations would cause difficulties in terms of security in the prison and that the person who was trying to make on oral presentation in such circumstances would be under pressure. A range of technical challenges were also mentioned. However, I believe that offering an opportunity to make that representation orally but by closed-circuit television would overcome many of the problems that have been raised. Issues were raised about whether the prisoner would be able to hear everything that was being said. I suggest that the amendment covers that eventuality and should provide for the right kind of presentation. Amendment 23 is consequential and concerns the videolink. Amendment 24 relates to the Scottish ministers issuing guidance to the Scottish Court Service on the minimum standards to apply to the provision of information in relation to solemn procedure. The amendment seeks to ensure that the witnesses and victims who go to court under solemn procedure and wish access to information are guaranteed access to a series of pieces of information. We have not gone into the detail of what the information might be—I think that that would be subject to discussion—but victims have told us that they appear in court without necessarily ever having been in a court before and without having had the opportunity to visit when it is empty, that they have ended up in situations in which they feel oppressed by being placed too close to an accused person, and that they have had no understanding of procedures before they enter. The amendment would enable advice to be offered, guidelines to be issued and a benchmark to be set. I move amendment 22.

I am disappointed that the cabinet secretary has responded as he has. I am not surprised that he sees little value, as the value would be from the point of view of the victim, who would have the opportunity to express an impact assessment personally and know that they had been heard by the person whom they knew to be the perpetrator. We spoke earlier about restorative justice, and there is no doubt in my mind that, if the victim sees value in it and wants to make an oral representation, the system should be capable of enabling that to happen. I press amendment 22.

I thank the clerks of, and the colleagues who remain on, the Justice Committee for the work that they have done and the commitment that they have shown over the past few months in dealing with the bill. Despite the fact that many of the amendments that we proposed this afternoon were unsuccessful, it is appropriate to thank those who, on behalf of the Parliament, prepared those amendments for the high-quality work that they turned round. Most of all, I record my thanks to the victims who came forward and shared their experience of the current situation and the system that operates to deliver justice throughout Scotland. There is no doubt that that experience has been a very mixed bag. As I indicated earlier, the approach that has been taken in the bill was driven largely by a desire to ensure that Scotland fell into step with European directives on victims and witnesses, which is a laudable outcome in itself. However, I think that that approach has meant that there has not been quite enough focus on the needs of victims and witnesses in the light of the reality of their experience in our system. To that extent, I am disappointed at the lack of ambition to deliver on some of the needs that victims and witnesses have been so willing to share with us. The cabinet secretary has indicated that the ability of services to deliver a uniformity of provision is extremely important for the future, and I agree. However, in evidence to the Justice Committee, it was made very clear by witnesses from the police and other services that, at the moment, they do not have the facilities to deliver the kind of information that is required in a format that witnesses and victims would find acceptable. That is a real worry and concern for the years ahead, as we look to see how we can improve the experience of witnesses. I hope that the cabinet secretary will remember that evidence and take particular account of the need to ensure that systems operate effectively and collaboratively within each service and across services. We have rehearsed the impact on witnesses and victims of their experience in court. I found it moving to discover that their experience of the court process had an impact that almost matched their experience of the crime and to hear that they did not understand what was happening or the layout of the court, because no one had explained to them the processes that they were to enter into. Despite my experience of nearly four decades, something that had passed me by was the fact that many victims and families find it extremely galling and painful to constantly have to iterate the name of the accused to find out information about the case. There must be a way in which our system can adapt so that it can deal with such details, given the impact that they have on victims, which can remain with them for years. On victims’ involvement in the victim notification scheme, it became apparent that to receive through the post, out of the blue, an official letter that is written in bureaucratic language and which is necessarily devoid of emotion takes the victim or their family right back to the crime and leaves them at home—often alone—to consider their next steps. In one case, the widow of the deceased in a murder trial was left to make contact with the authorities in the way that was indicated in the letter. She eventually received six letters that identified five named contacts, yet there was still an absence of information. Although we have considered how we can move forward into a brave new world, the cabinet secretary needs to understand that the world in which we exist is far removed from the guidance and the decisions that the Parliament has taken to protect our victims and witnesses. We have spoken a great deal about the issue and the impact that it has on victims but, from a selfish point of view, the Parliament should be concerned about the range of victims and witnesses who have suffered as a result of the system. The system cannot work if the public do not have the confidence to engage with it. When people who have been victimised are witnesses in court, they are often left denuded of any confidence as citizens. They are left damaged and less able to rejoin the community as fully fledged citizens, and they are certainly less willing to engage with the system or to become involved in it again the future. All the amendments were lodged with a view to improving the situation—to balancing the rights of the accused with the needs of the victims and witnesses in our system. I hope that the cabinet secretary has taken account of some of the evidence that we have offered through the afternoon and that he will take steps to improve the bill’s contents.

The young people’s sports panel is to be congratulated on its contribution to the draft strategy. Great opportunities, people and locations are what our young people demand. They want to participate in something that is attractive and first-class. As Margo MacDonald indicated earlier, a higher profile for physical education as a subject in its own right is essential and—to add another aspect—it needs to cost what people and their families can afford. Today’s debate is timely. This morning, the British Journal of Sports Medicine published a report from one of its contributors that the absence of a United Kingdom policy on physical activity is mass child neglect. Although I would not go so far in my own estimation of what that means, I understand the point that the writer is trying to make. The minister has, quite properly, said a lot about the successes with the strategy thus far. However, within the healthy living survey, there is a statistic that indicates that children’s participation in sport has decreased from 73 per cent in 2009 to 66 per cent in 2012. That is an important statistic that we need to take account of. Schools’ commitment to sport and a meaningful provision of physical education is vital to the links between wider education, PE attainment and the development of the individual. Although it is welcome that £5.8 million is to be dedicated to improving PE lessons, that £5.8 million is being given over a two-year period.

I suppose a number of answers could be offered. Our computer generation and so on have all been alluded to, but at the end of the day it is about making sport attractive and meaningful to young people so that they will engage with it. It is about providing sports that are relevant to those young people. As was indicated earlier, in this country it is dark for too many months, it is a bit wet on occasions, and it can be a bit cold. No doubt most members have acknowledged that, having become involved in sport, once people get out there they enjoy it, even in such circumstances, and they engage when their PE teachers are first-class and know how to bring out the best in their pupils. Let us bear it in mind that the £5.8 million is to be spread among 376 high schools, 193 special schools and 2,153 primary school locations. I know that it will be invested at the top end, but once it is spread out among all the pupils in Scotland it does not amount to much. I know that some schools currently spend more than £600 per month hiring buses in order to get pupils to locations so that they can engage in the very education that we seek to support. The youth sport strategy aims to ensure high-quality sports coaching, more competitive sport between schools and the full involvement of disabled pupils, but we should bear it in mind that many PE teachers are teaching to classes of 30. Those involved in community sports training for coaches have indicated that they would prefer that classes should be no more than 15 if that education is to be worth while in those circumstances. I commend the minister for leading from the front. Today is a day not only to laud what has been achieved in the past but to note that there is much more to be achieved in future. If we are to give our children a future, we need to take those matters more seriously.

We should remember that we have faced 35 years of challenge in relation to drugs misuse as it affects Scotland. As many members have said, in that time, much has been achieved by those who are employed by the Government and those in the third sector through the various elements of work that they do to combat the threats, dangers and health risks that are presented by drugs misuse. In that light, I welcome the presentation of Dr Brian Kidd’s report and the work done by the team who assisted him. Jim Eadie rightly identified that the strategic approach that underlies some of the lessons that Dr Kidd outlines is one of the most important messages. Willie Rennie mentioned that he has visited some groups. Like him, I have visited many groups. However, I do not fully agree with his assessment of how we arrived at the current situation. It is fair to say that, when the review was initiated, there was a growing clamour and criticism in the Parliament—I was one of those who offered criticisms—and a campaign by the Daily Record. The review took place on the back of those developments. No matter what brought the review to pass, it is most welcome. In my view, there was never a presentation that suggested that there should be an end to opioid replacement therapies. To argue that there was is either a misunderstanding of the case or a misrepresentation of what people were trying to achieve. The problem that we were trying to address, which we now understand more clearly, is the number of people in Scotland who are accessing treatment therapies, particularly methadone. That is in excess of 20,000 people, with the cost of the service that is being provided estimated to be about £36 million, or £100,000 a day. The number of drugs deaths has risen to a record high and, last year, 41 per cent of those deaths involved methadone. Unfortunately, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime places Scotland in the unenviable position of leading the league tables on opioid abuse, which is not something that any of us would wish to be the case. There has rightly been cross-party support for successive Government and Administration policies. However, that support should not be given without a commitment and without the ability for us to offer observations and criticisms. It is important that the new review has focused firmly on recovery-oriented systems of care. I welcome that impetus and focus on delivery of outcomes that involve recovery, which can mean many things to many people. I hope that the minister will say at the end of the debate that steps will be taken to deal with the lack of evidence presented by some ADPs regarding a real impetus towards recovery, that the real concerns around the lack of progress found in many ADP areas on the delivery of recovery-orientated systems of care will be dealt with and that he will monitor the outcomes. The third point made in the report is that a lack of institutional memory has led to repeated mistakes, false trails and a failure to capitalise on success. As was said earlier, the report refers to improving local information systems to better identify people on ORT so that we know what works. There will not be a member—I include those in this chamber and those who have not attended the debate—who does not want the Government to succeed; we all want success in this area. However, we need to measure what we are doing. We need to know that what is being done in our name through the policy of “The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland’s Drug Problem” is effective and is giving everyone who is involved in treatment the opportunity to succeed on their terms. It has been said that some people will not recover and that they will require to be maintained through methadone or some other means. We need to accept that, but we need also to have an ambition for every patient who enters our care, to give them a chance to be all they can be in their lives and to allow them to play a full part in their family, their community and Scotland’s future. In that context, we urge the ministers to apply the lessons from the review with some energy and to come back to the chamber regularly to tell us what has been achieved and what benefits we have gained from applying the pressures as suggested. I support the amendment in the name of Elaine Murray. Thank you for the opportunity to speak in the debate.

What discussions has the Deputy First Minister had with her opposite numbers at Westminster on the delivery of national security? The document indicates that the Government’s “first responsibility” is to reflect MI5, MI6, the Government Communications Headquarters and measures to deal with national cyberthreats with a “security and intelligence agency”. Will she give us confidence on her costings?

The cabinet secretary mentioned the Secretary of State for Scotland’s apparent commitment to a willingness to move towards a coupled support level of 10 per cent. We are all disappointed with the current arrangements with the UK Government, and I am sure that farmers from across the south of Scotland will share that disappointment. When will the cabinet secretary begin the necessary work to produce a suitable case for a change to the percentages? What timescale does he think will apply to that work?

I hope that it is not unkind to note that the number of people in the public gallery has dwindled somewhat as the afternoon has gone on. I would like to think that that is because of people’s travel commitments rather than the nature of our business this afternoon. There is no doubt that tribunals are a somewhat unattractive subject matter for many people in public life and for the general public. However, having been fortunate enough to hear evidence on the bill in the Justice Committee earlier in the year, when I was a member, it is evident to me that the tribunals that oversee matters on behalf of the public across Scotland provide a service that individual citizens value greatly and from which they expect a great deal. We have heard that about 80,000 cases are conducted by various tribunals in Scotland each year in pursuit of justice. The sheer volume of cases is indicative of the challenges that individual citizens face as they approach tribunals for adjudication. There is a David and Goliath aspect to the experience in a tribunal, as an individual member of the public tries to understand their rights and how matters have been decided on, and as the tribunal tries to explain, on their behalf, whether the person has certain rights or the reasons why they cannot access them. To that extent, it is welcome that the Scottish Government is, through the bill, attempting to clarify the process in tribunals across the country and to bring some order to the way in which they conduct their business. As a young student, I conducted a course in constitutional and administrative law as part of my degree course at the University of Glasgow. In those years, I was in danger of being overcome by the sheer volume of information and the complex nature of tribunals. It is sobering to realise that now, as a grey-headed member of the Parliament, I am still in danger of being overwhelmed by the complexity and sheer volume of information. The appointment of the Lord President to oversee the implementation of the new bill is to be welcomed. He will provide leadership and vision in taking forward the future for tribunals across this country and will represent the interests of tribunals to Scottish ministers and the Parliament.

Very much so. Some of the debate in the Justice Committee indicated that there were those within the tribunal environment who believed that, through experience and time, they had come to understand what was good for us all. I think that each of us in the chamber realises that, as much as we do not need too many rules, it is important that we write some rules down that we can all acknowledge as delivering a clear outcome. The Lord President’s second responsibility is “securing the efficient disposal of business”. With over 80,000 cases going through tribunals, it is evident that the efficient disposal of business is important not only for the financial wellbeing of the Government in supporting tribunals but for the individual clients who are trying to get their cases through the tribunal process. In the context of the requirement to secure the efficient disposal of business, I hope that fees will not become an attractive new way to generate the finance that is required to support tribunals. As Ms McInnes said, many people who access tribunals have virtually no money. Indeed, a person might approach a tribunal precisely because they are in dire circumstances. In such circumstances, to charge a fee would be to deny people justice. I am heartened that there is an indication that the Government understands that, and I hope that that will be reflected in the bill that we pass. I want to mention three more issues. First, the definition of “tribunal” is worth reviewing, to see whether it can be clarified. Secondly, in relation to schedule 7, which sets out how members will be appointed, concern was expressed in the Justice Committee that the disbarring of members who have reached the age of 70 from continuing in their appointment might well create a vacuum in tribunal membership and in the experience that is necessary in that regard. The issue has not been mentioned today and perhaps it has been addressed since I left the committee. I hope that the Government takes account of those concerns. I am conscious of time, so I will end my speech there.

Prior to the 2011 election, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice’s resistance to the creation of a single police force was well known. Post the election, economic realities affecting countries across the western hemisphere obviously persuaded him otherwise. After years of inaction, we witnessed a hell-for-leather pursuit of reorganisation. Promises came from the cabinet secretary, the convener of the Scottish Police Authority and the new chief constable of a national police service committed to delivering local policing and dedicated to local community partnerships, but the Government’s actions have delivered otherwise. Our debate today is driven by the effects of two Scottish National Party directives to the Scottish Police Authority: that there must be 17,327 police officers across the country, at an added cost of around £35 million to the budget; and that, at the same time, the police force has to deliver £140 million in savings by 2016. As a result of those directives, 1,200 police staff posts have gone. Although the chief constable has “no policy” on backfilling those posts, when he appeared before the Justice Committee this week he finally accepted that some officers are having to engage in administrative tasks. I know that those tasks include personnel, recruitment, warrant management, intelligence analysis and others that have been announced recently.

I hope that, if the cabinet secretary gives me time to develop my argument, he will see where we are coming from. Seventy of the people who have been given voluntary redundancy previously delivered citations for the court, and those duties are to be passed to police officers on patrol. So we are moving from backroom bobbies to police posties. It will be useful to hear from front-line officers whether they can spare the estimated 123,000 hours that it takes each year to deliver those citations. The absence of comment from the Scottish Police Federation and the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents seems to indicate that street officers have sufficient time to take on additional administrative tasks and postie duties. All of that is to deliver on Mr MacAskill’s cuts. The amendment that has been lodged reeks of complacency. Although crime is down to a 39-year low, that outcome has not solely been delivered in the past few years; it is thanks to 20 years of hard work by all concerned. There are 1,000 additional officers but, depending on who one speaks to, that number might or might not include up to 350 officers who are paid for from local authority budgets. We should remember the 1,200 support staff whose jobs have been lost. In any case, the £35 million cost of the additional posts pales in comparison with the £140 million of budget cuts. Mr MacAskill would do well to keep company with Theresa May, who also lauds the continuing drop in reported crime—in the case of England, to 1980 levels. She has also pursued a reduction—in her case, of 14,000 officers across England. He could keep company with just about every justice minister in Europe, Canada and America.

I ask the cabinet secretary please to let me continue. The Government’s budget decisions have resulted in the need to consider the closure of 65 police office counters and reductions in service at a further 75. That means a cut in service in more than half the offices in Scotland, even though not one additional police officer will be placed on the street. I am sure that, during the debate, we will hear about the impact of that, as it affects virtually every region and city in the country. To name but a few, the changes will affect stations in Airdrie, Coatbridge, Wishaw, Portobello, Anderston in Glasgow, Oakley and Bucksburn.

If the cabinet secretary spent more time worrying about Scotland and getting it organised, we might have a better outcome in the political life of Scotland. The statistics that are given in support of the closures are largely admitted to be ropey and historical. The closures are not driven by the desire to deliver better local policing or to support local partnerships, as we are told; they are driven by budget cuts, and that is shameful. Although some are of the view that the use of police stations is no longer necessary and that we should move to mobile phones, the internet and Twitter, in many places, the police office is the heart and soul of the community. For parents worried about a missing child, relatives worrying about a missing grandparent, a youth going home early in the morning worrying that he is going to be accosted, a young woman worried about a stranger who is following her, or a homeless person who is facing a bout of anxiety, a counter staff member offers the quality of service that they need.

I am afraid not. Some years ago, a householder watching the BBC news at 9 o’clock saw that a terrible murder had been committed in Glasgow in which a woman and child had been stabbed to death. He realised that a workmate, who had unexpectedly called at his home and who was then seated in his kitchen alongside his wife and baby, was the likely murderer. The householder left the house in panic and ran half a mile to an open police office and made a report at the counter, which, thankfully, resulted in a successful outcome—a murderer arrested and no possibility of further mayhem. In such circumstances, I do not think that a tweet would offer any solution or that an e-mail would support us. We must value the work that our counter assistants carry out. Mr MacAskill says that we are investing in local policing and enhancing services, but the Government looks increasingly like the ministry of truth. It keeps repeating the mantra, “Crime down, numbers up, life good.” However, the findings of the Scottish policing performance framework—the cabinet secretary’s own framework report—announced that, in some communities, 50 per cent of people do not believe that the police prevent crime, 87 per cent believe that the crime rate is the same as or worse than it was a year ago and two thirds do not bother to report thefts or housebreaking. Communities are under stress and need support. I suggest that members look to their communities and support my motion. I hope that they have the courage to back their local police service and avoid being caught up in the mantra of “Crime down, numbers up, life good.” Life will be good if we can maintain a local police service that is worthy of the name. I move, That the Parliament believes that the Scottish Government’s budget cuts are having a significant impact on the link between communities and their local police service; notes concern at plans to close police station public counters and reduce opening hours; also notes concern at the use of police officers to cover for cuts in the number of police staff; encourages people to make the case to save the service offered by their local police station and stand up for their local police service; condemns the practice of back-filling of staff posts by police officers, and calls on the Scottish Government to defend local policing.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I take it, from what the cabinet secretary says, that there is no cut in Scotland. However, £140 million is a substantial cut and is having such an impact that the chief constable does not believe that he can sustain current police numbers much longer.

I remind the cabinet secretary that my colleague asked him a question. He was asked whether providing daytime-only services is sufficient in a place such as Possilpark.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Would the cabinet secretary look at the motion again and acknowledge that we do not seek to denigrate police officers in any way? What we criticise is the cabinet secretary’s responsibility for policy in future.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The cabinet secretary will be aware that our prison population is rising. The Government’s forecast is that there will be 9,500 prisoners incarcerated in the coming years. Does he intend to build more prisons?

I commend Alison Johnstone for achieving a debate that examines the safety of pedestrians and cyclists on Scotland’s roads. The Government quite properly encourages a healthy lifestyle and is keen to encourage cycling and walking on our public byways. That is entirely right and reflects the approach of previous Administrations. Statistics covering the past 10 years make for dire reading, as the minister will know. The statistics that I obtained show that 88 cyclists were killed in the 10 years to 2012 and 1,408 cyclists were seriously injured during the same period—and those numbers could be multiplied many times to reach the number of those suffering slight injuries. We are dealing with a serious public safety issue. I acknowledge that the Government currently spends around £60 million a year examining active travel and infrastructure, and I know that the minister recently announced an additional £20 million to be spent over the next two years. One hopes that that spend will focus primarily on road safety issues and the protection of cyclists and pedestrians. Any increase in funding is a matter for the minister and the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth under the current budgetary arrangements. It will be interesting to hear from the minister what he might achieve in that regard. Although this has not been directly alluded to, I have discovered that strict liability seems to polarise public opinion. There are those who are very supportive of the concept; equally, a number of people are vehemently against the notion that strict liability should be introduced in Scotland. I understand both opinions. Like Maureen Watt, I searched the material provided to find a link between the introduction of new legislation and a fall in the number of accidents and injuries; unfortunately, no such link is entirely obvious. I would be interested to hear whether the minister would undertake to achieve a better understanding of the implications for road safety of strict, or stricter, liability, so that a more informed approach could be taken and we could address whether improvements could be achieved. The motion provides a good linchpin for discussions around safety. It would be useful for the minister to commit the Scottish Government to take matters forward by bringing together key stakeholders and any experts whom he can access with the intention of establishing consensus around future recommendations. That would allow us to achieve consensus in the chamber on whether legislation was necessary, desirable and effective and would create a means of providing safety for those people who seek to use our public highways for walking or cycling. Importantly, there is no doubt that the minister and his Government are going some way to encourage the development of cycling across Scotland, about which they are very enthusiastic. However, they have a real responsibility to take on board the issues that the motion raises, with a view to pulling together a positive way of taking them forward and coming up with a better way for the future.

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for bringing the motion to the Parliament because the debate allows us to address a very significant issue in the criminal process in Scotland and our ability to rehabilitate those who commit crime in our communities. The cabinet secretary is in unfamiliar territory today, because my approach does not differ much from his on the need to review the 1974 act. There is no doubt that it is very important that people are able to put their criminal past behind them. Equally, the cabinet secretary must acknowledge that the issue is a contentious one in the broader public view. People who might employ someone who has convictions have a responsibility not solely to their other employees but to the businesses that they run and the services that they provide. They also have a responsibility to the customers who access those businesses and services. That is the nub of the challenge that we will face in any review of the 1974 act. The cabinet secretary quite properly acknowledges that one in three males and one in 10 females are likely to have a conviction of some sort. It is difficult to identify a conviction as having been spent. The creation of Disclosure Scotland and the notion of enhanced disclosures have also made knowing where the balance might lie a technically difficult issue. It is difficult for any legislature to measure the ability of bureaucracy to acknowledge and properly apportion risk in relation to each individual employment opportunity. From my point of view, the aspect that the cabinet secretary has focused on today—the legislation—is probably only a small part of how one might rehabilitate offenders. The purpose of prison is to punish offenders, to incapacitate offenders and protect the public, to deter potential offenders and to rehabilitate. Unfortunately, in “Reducing Reoffending in Scotland”, Audit Scotland’s analysis of the current problem seems to indicate that in terms of effectiveness and efficiency, our prisons just are not doing that. Thirty per cent of convicted offenders in 2009-10 were reconvicted within a year. Although that gives us no indication of how often those people had offended, they were certainly reconvicted within a year—and the percentage rises to nearly 40 per cent within two years. In 2010-11, the Scottish Prison Service and others provided reducing reoffending services at a cost to the public purse of £128 million. The Prison Service spent an additional £419 million dealing with convicted prisoners. In our prison estate, there are 9,500 prisoners who have been convicted on at least 10 occasions—many have been convicted much more than 10 times. We are talking about an on-going crime wave, year on year.

The member is quite correct and I am grateful to him for raising that point of clarification. No, the 9,500 are not all in prison at the one time, although I am sure that some members of the public wish that they were. It is important to note that 1,308 separate services for offenders are currently provided in Scotland. I am concerned about how victims and witnesses view that provision. Our prisons need to concentrate on purposeful activity, but HM prisons inspectorate for Scotland and Audit Scotland have noted that purposeful activity is somewhat wanting in our prisons.

Again, I am grateful to the member. He has saved me from saying something that I was going to say later. It is true that there are examples of good practice, and we need to see such examples of what works across the whole prison estate. In his final report, Brigadier Hugh Munro reported that in Polmont prison, for example, some young offenders are still in their beds in the afternoon. Watching day-time television is not, in his view, a substitute for purposeful activity. We know what the problems are before we get to the stage of deciding whether to disclose previous convictions. The problems are a lack of numeracy, a lack of literacy, an inability to deal with alcohol and drug abuse, and mental illness among some prisoners. We need to look at rehabilitation in the round. Important as it is to know when we should disclose convictions and how disclosure should be managed, it is not just about that. How do we enable those men and women who are being churned repeatedly through the prison system without any purpose or future and with little hope?

I am grateful to the member—I hope that I will come on to that point as I go through my speech. Prisoners often face problems when they return to the community, and not only in relation to facing up to their convictions. Quite often, they face simple problems. Will the authorities provide them with a home—with somewhere to stay of an evening—the day after they are released from prison, for example? How do prisoners access and retain their family relationships while they are in custody? Who prepares them for a job experience while they are incarcerated? Giving prisoners the opportunity to learn skills in prisons, to be taught what a working day is, and to face up to the responsibilities that they need to face up to is an important lead-in to the use of legislation on the disclosure of previous convictions. The other point that the cabinet secretary needs to acknowledge—I hope that he will when he closes the debate—is the need for strong leadership, which is highlighted on page 34 of the Audit Scotland report. The report says: “Stronger leadership is required if the level of reoffending is to be significantly reduced.” That leadership needs to come primarily from the cabinet secretary’s office and go both to those who lead the various services that are designed to help prisoners in terms of reoffending and to those within the wider criminal justice community. The difficulty that we face is that the Government’s own statistics show growth in the number of prisoners, which will have to be managed. It is anticipated that the prison population will rise to 9,500 during the next four to five years. That is a tragedy for the prisoners themselves as well as being a tragedy for the victims whom they have left behind and for the families who rely on those men and women coming back to their communities in due course. I acknowledge that mentoring is important, as are interconnected services that will provide for offenders as they return from prison. However, it is also important for the Government to acknowledge the difference between reconviction rates and reoffending rates. [Interruption.] As we go forward, the cabinet secretary should ensure that he maintains a vision of the key issues, that the crime statistics fall and that the prisoners who go through our system are properly managed to give them the opportunity to address their offending and problems so that they become constructive members of our Scottish communities.

Presumably, the behaviour of a prisoner during their time in custody would have a bearing on rehabilitation after sentence. It could be that, at the time of sentencing, a young person demonstrated themselves to be antisocial but, during their months and years in custody, repaired much of that damage. As a result, the comments of a judge at the time of sentencing might have become dated and worthless.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what financial support it will provide to East Ayrshire Council to assist with the restoration of opencast mines. (S4O-02439)

I am obliged to the minister for that reply. As he will be aware, this month East Ayrshire Council received a report on the additional costs that it may face for restoring land that was previously used for opencast facilities, which the council will be incapable of financing in the medium term. Is he able to give some indication that he will take steps to alleviate that problem?

I begin with an admission: not once have I held a golf club on a course and played the game.

Indeed, I take the view that, as Mark Twain said, “Golf is a good walk spoiled.” Winston Churchill followed up on that by saying: “Golf is a game whose aim is to hit a very small ball into an even smaller hole, with weapons singularly ill-designed for the purpose.” In my earlier life as a police officer, the first knowledge that I had of golf clubs was as the weapons of young men who went out for the occasional gang fight of a Saturday night. Therefore, I am ill prepared to speak on the subject of the Ryder cup.

I am obliged to the member. It is good to know that he was about at the time to hear that personally. Many years ago it was a duty of mine to attend Turnberry on the day that Tom Watson won the open. At first hand, I was exposed to the glamour of the event, the excitement of the day, the adulation of the crowd and the impact on Ayrshire, which forms part of the area that I represent—the south of Scotland. On the back of that experience, I am not a complete philistine when it comes to the subject of golf. For the information of members in the chamber, the Ryder cup first became known as such in 1927. It is great to know that it was an Englishman—a man from St Albans—who paid the 100 guineas so that the Ryder cup could be purchased for the purpose and the event could take place. I am sure that Scottish National Party members will forgive me for saying that one of the benefits of belonging to a United Kingdom is that our colleagues from across the home nations can come together in a sportsmanlike fashion. There are four main issues that I want to raise in connection with the Ryder cup. First, it will provide a wonderful shop window for Scotland as an experience. The warmth of our people, the generosity of our communities and the culture that is Scotland are memorable for many folk who come to our land for such events. Over the decades, I have witnessed at first hand how people have come to Scotland for such events and gone away with a wonderful view of what Scotland is and what our people represent. Such investment in our world relationships is invaluable. The Ryder cup will allow people to enjoy at first hand our environment and our clean air, to see the sights of our hills, mountains and lochs, and to experience the sheer peace that our country offers, which we too often take for granted. They will be exposed to our culture, our music and the gifts that our people bring with them from their experience and background. Secondly, the Ryder cup will encourage tourism and investment in it, as Dennis Robertson mentioned. On the back of that, it will create the opportunity for business links and partnerships to be built for the future, and for investment to be made where it is needed most—in our landward areas, which will be able to attract blue riband tourism events in future. We can hope that the people who come for the Ryder cup will come back and bring their friends with them. The third and, for me, most important aspect of the Ryder cup is that it will allow the development of education for our young people who will be exposed—in a way that I was not—to the experience of golf at first hand. They will be exposed to knowledge about what golf can do for them—for their energy and their completeness of balance in life experience. That will build in them health and a requirement to participate in activities in the open air. The least advantaged children should be given that opportunity. I hope that the minister will say how we can encourage children who do not get the opportunity to go to golf courses and do not see golf as being for them, because they are the very people who need the experience and should be developed further. They should develop a taste for sport in the round; I hope not only that they would take pleasure in the game of golf but that it would introduce them to other games and sports. That creates the opportunity to develop the child as a whole. Finally, with Government promotion the Ryder cup will benefit the south of Scotland. One hopes that the Government will promote the many courses across the south of Scotland. They are first-class courses that nobody ever hears about but which one stumbles into on tours around the country. When our visitors—particularly our American and Chinese visitors—go to those courses, they see them as the jewels in the crown. We need to laud that. The Ryder cup will provide experience for the emergency services—for police, ambulance and local authority staff and many others—in how to deal with major events. That experience becomes invaluable when we face disaster and challenges that are less palatable. The volunteering scheme is to be lauded, but the worry about sponsorship is genuine. I hope that those in the private sector who know about sponsorship will come forward to sponsor even more people to play a part in volunteering. Financing for the coaching for life programme, which enables Quarriers to give young people a second chance in life, will be a wonderful outcome of the Ryder cup. I hope that all the golfers will enjoy the experience with wonderful gusto; I might catch sight of it on the television occasionally. I only hope that Scotland benefits to the extent that all of us wish it to. If we can spend our lives in sport instead of unemployment and other downbeat ways, Scotland will be a wonderful place in the 21st century. I wish the minister well in promoting all aspects of the Ryder cup, and I support the motion and the amendment.

Will the cabinet secretary acknowledge that the views and recommendations of the senators of the College of Justice are somewhat different and that to accept the recommendation of solely Lord Carloway is a dangerous way forward?

Thank you, Presiding Officer, for giving me the opportunity to wind up in the debate. It is evident from the views that have been expressed by members around the chamber that there is an element of discomfort in our consideration of whether we should welcome or challenge the proposal to abolish the requirement for corroboration. We should bear it in mind that Lord Carloway’s job was not to report specifically on corroboration but to address much wider elements of criminal justice. He included his comments on the corroboration requirement on his own account, and they were not supported by the balance of the group that dealt with the inquiry. Equally, the senators of the College of Justice have expressed their reservations about the way forward, and the convener of the Justice Committee has gone some way in expressing her views, based on her experience of convening the committee. I believe that we should take one bit of guidance from Lord Carloway. It is important that, when we decide the facts of the matter, we weigh the quality of evidence that has been provided in the discussions at the Justice Committee, and not merely the names of those who support or do not support the proposals. Scottish Labour is not distant from reform. We have led reform for many decades, and there is no doubt that the courts and the legal process need reform. My worry is that the proposal involves merely fiddling with one part of the system without considering the impacts that might derive from doing so. In removing the requirement for corroboration, we have not considered what has been described throughout the debate as a system of justice, and for centuries, corroboration has been acknowledged as a benchmark and a central part of that system. When we interfere with the system, it is important that we consider the knock-on impacts—on verdicts, for example. Do we need two or three verdicts in future? Michael McMahon’s proposals have lain fallow for many months—indeed, years—but will the change result in more trials? Victims and witnesses may go through a process in which there is no hope of a conviction at the end. The cabinet secretary often mentions what is happening south of the border—by which I presume he means England. The conviction rates there are no better than those in Scotland. We should be consolidating our position. We would like witnesses and victims to be given a fair hearing in court, but we need the Government to provide the checks and balances, rather than putting them up for auction so that members can offer alternatives. We need sizeable proposals that will put our minds at rest that what we are doing will make our system better; we do not need headlines that simply say that we have changed something and have thereby been seen to reform. It is beyond consideration that witnesses whose evidence becomes the only source of a successful prosecution will be challenged very robustly in court in future. At present, the experience of such witnesses is pretty devastating. I would like to think that the cabinet secretary will not only listen today, but implement additional checks and balances in his final proposals and put our minds at rest by assuring us that, in removing the corroboration requirement, we will have produced a better system.

Does the cabinet secretary understand that the issues that we have raised with him are not so much about the investigation and the first port of call, but about how the courts will deal with the changes, how juries will assess the evidence, what a jury will look like and how the verdicts will be achieved?

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government considers the impact will be on local policing of reported plans to replace local police officers with officers from other divisions on public holidays to avoid double-time payments. (S4F-01563)

After discussions with a divisional commander, a local council leader said that they were dealing with “these very difficult cuts”. The Scottish Police Federation has expressed concern that no discussions led up to the development. The chief constable said in the Aberdeen Evening Express that he had insufficient budget to maintain police numbers. The City of Edinburgh Council’s Labour-SNP administration has decided to review its current commitment to pay for additional local police officers to patrol its city; I have no doubt that other local authorities will follow that. Given that, will the First Minister consider whether the cornerstone of policing success in Scotland since 1800—the maintenance of the policing of local communities by local police officers—

—is being abandoned as a result of the Government’s actions, despite repeated assurances that the national police service would deliver community policing across Scotland’s communities?

I will support the motion as amended by Claire Baker. I acknowledge the minister’s recognition of the complexity of what we are discussing this afternoon, and his case-by-case approach in relation to the problem that it raises. I also acknowledge all that Adam Ingram said in terms of the issue’s impact on East Ayrshire Council, in particular, and I will flesh out some of those impacts, in order that the minister might consider them further. There are currently 1,468 hectares of abandoned, disturbed and unrestored land across the East Ayrshire Council area. Some 524 hectares of land are classified as voids; a void can be a chasm 50m deep, with water at its bottom. What does that area look like to us? It has been described elsewhere as being like 4,000 football pitches. Both classifications represent a real health and safety danger to the public, and both categories dampen any future economic development opportunities. In 2012, the Scottish Coal Company Ltd approached East Ayrshire Council to seek a business rates holiday. That was another clue that something was going badly wrong in the company. East Ayrshire has for generations suffered the disruption that accompanies opencast mining. It has provided the location and much of the workforce, and it has suffered the inconvenience. To this day, East Ayrshire continues to pay for the presence of the industry in its midst. All of that was done to provide coal and, thereby, energy for Scotland’s and the United Kingdom’s economic wellbeing. No one volunteers to have an opencast mine development on their doorstep. The industry is dirty, dangerous and dust laden. However, without opencast mining, East Ayrshire would be even poorer than it currently is. That is saying something, given the jobs that have transferred out of the area and the paucity of inward investment. East Ayrshire has one of the highest rates of youth unemployment in the country; some 12.2 per cent of young people are out of work there. That compares with 7.2 per cent in Scotland and 6.1 per cent in the UK. The current SNP council has failed in its duty of proper governance to provide a level of accountability and responsibility on the part of SCCL and other companies. However, in fairness, successive local authority administrators have failed in that regard.

Including Labour. However, that does not mean that the people of East Ayrshire should bear the burden of fixing the problem on their own. We need a commitment to an annual mining plan for each area that is affected by developments, and we need annual checks to ensure that an environmental audit has verified compliance with environmental conditions. I welcome the minister’s commitment to more effective regulation for the future, but it is just as important that the Government offer its colleagues in East Ayrshire Council some financial comfort now so that it can begin the rebuilding of that blighted area to give it any hope of competing in the future. The current Scottish Government’s stance appears to abandon East Ayrshire Council to deal with the costs of repairing the landscape and dealing with the voids. If that happens, the per capita cost across the council area will equate to between £1,600 and £5,000. Current estimates of the costs were mentioned earlier—they are up to £161 million. Other estimated costs are between £71 million and £113 million. In either case, that is far too much for the council to bear on its own, given that guarantee bonds to cover the work appear to total somewhere around £28.5 million. Who is to bear those costs? Apparently, it is not the companies. East Ayrshire Council would need to allocate a third of its entire budget to repair the property.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. In its report, East Ayrshire Council acknowledged that the “previous enforcement of these matters has not been to the standard expected and thus the monitoring of these matters by the Planning Authority requires to be more robust now and in the future.” The Scottish coal industry task force has met on four occasions with the minister as its chair. Will the minister state precisely how he intends to deal with the financial tsunami that East Ayrshire Council faces? Some 311 employees of Aardvark and SCCL have been made redundant in the chaos. What will the Government do to support those innocent hard-working victims? Remaining assets are being picked over by private interests. Is it ethical, decent and honest to expect the communities of East Ayrshire to bear responsibility for the clean-up, or will the Government step forward and assist? Some 2.5 million tonnes of the 4.8 million tonnes that have been extracted in Scotland came from East Ayrshire. In fact, more coal is taken from East Ayrshire through opencast mining than is taken from the whole of Wales, and the amount is almost the same as is taken in England. The situation is scandalous and it is an embarrassment to East Ayrshire Council and the UK and Scottish Governments. The pressure will continue to be unfairly faced by the people of East Ayrshire if no solution is provided in the short term. What discussions will the Scottish Government have with the UK Government to ensure that the situation is not repeated? Can the minister assure me that East Ayrshire will get enterprise zone status to assist the area in reclaiming its future? Will he reconsider his previous decision to offer the area no financial contribution to repairing the environmental damage that has arisen? We should remember that it is 4,000 football pitches in size. It needs some kind of response.

The cabinet secretary has discussed the programme of court closures. Would he be good enough to share with us whether he is aware of any on-going conversations about a new phase of future closures under consideration?

Scotland’s heritage and how we look after it are critical to our country’s future, although that is not always recognised by the general public, by politicians or by Governments. We have a duty of care for our heritage—which has been passed to us by our ancestors who gave so much of themselves and their time—in order to ensure that we know our history, as some sort of guide to our future path in the world. Heritage has the ability to attract large numbers of people from around the world. They want to understand it, and in so doing they will finance its care. In addition, it provides jobs for Scotland and creates the virtuous circle of a vibrant economy. The impact that our heritage has on our development in the modern world will depend on a number of factors, and I hope that the cabinet secretary will allow me to point out some of them in a supportive, rather than critical, manner. The responses to the Government’s consultation suggest a view among Scotland’s heritage agencies that the strategy’s vision is not ambitious enough and that we should seek to deliver a broader vision with higher degrees of success and ambition attached to it. There is no doubt that Scotland has a brand to sell and a history to reveal, and it can do that for the benefit of everyone in the country. Finance and good governance will be important. Historic Scotland has forecast that its grant aid will reduce by 28 per cent between 2010-11 and 2014-15, from £49.6 million to £35.7 million.

I thank the cabinet secretary for her intervention, and I accept what she says. It is, however, important that, for that whole area of development to progress, it needs pump-priming and additional funding, if it is at all possible for the Government to find such funding. The role that Government ministers have in future relationships is vital to ensure that investment comes from our other partners. The consultation document barely mentions UNESCO and the world heritage sites—an omission that was made clear in comments from consultees. It would be useful to know that the cabinet secretary will bear in mind the lack of attention in that regard, and ensure that there is some recognition for, and access to, the international forms of support, which seems to be a glaring omission from a strategy such as this. The management of staff in any mergers that lie ahead will play a significant role, and those who are involved in governance and oversight would do well to remember the principles that were laid out in the Nolan report. All participants in the new arrangements, irrespective of the views that are expressed in the proposed strategy, should ensure that they will act with selflessness in the execution of their duties, and with objectivity in deciding on the issues. They should provide accountability to the public; the future investment that is needed to care for our heritage must be accounted for. We need openness, honesty and—above all—leadership for those who need direction, and we need to capture the public imagination. I welcome the comments from members about volunteers playing an important part in the future of Scotland’s heritage, but those volunteers need to have their imagination captured, because not everyone is as lucky as some of the members who have spoken this afternoon in terms of being able to understand the value that pertains to this whole enterprise. A concerted effort must be made to ensure that any restructuring offers the public an improved service. Attracting overseas visitors with a quality experience must be the priority. The historic environment must be sustainable economically, but there must also be sustainability in delivering our heritage for future generations. We need to pass on better to the next generation what was passed on to ourselves. It is not sufficient to merely maintain progress. I have some questions for the cabinet secretary; it would be helpful if she could answer them. Will the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland maintain its status as an Arts and Humanities Research Council accredited body and therefore attract research grants? Will the Government use its non-departmental public body structure to show sufficient leadership to draw engagement from the diverse communities that it seeks to enable? How will the Government open up heritage, arts and culture to the general public? Finally, it is appropriate to expect a proposed new body to pull together Crown properties, private properties and the voluntary sector to promote heritage tourism. Can the cabinet secretary ensure that that will be done with the kind of enthusiasm that we would expect?

I thank you, Presiding Officer, and the Parliament for giving me the opportunity to open this debate. I am also grateful to the Minister for External Affairs and International Development for taking time out to play a part in our debate. I hope that, at the conclusion of our discussions, we will have aided the Government in focusing in on some of the main issues that have been raised throughout Scotland and, in particular, in the cross-party group on China about developing and enhancing enterprise for Scotland and for China. Next month will mark the 64th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of China and will also mark a remarkable transformation in a country that is on course to replace America as the world’s largest economy. It is vital that Scotland does all that it can to forge close economic links with China to the benefit of both our countries. As convener of the cross-party group on China, I am aware of several needs that have been identified regularly that should be the focus of work by the Government. To assist members, I have bulletpointed those needs. The first is the need to establish direct flights between Scotland and China. Even one flight per month is deemed to improve our relationships with people who would engage with Scotland and who want to know more about us. The second issue, which is a difficult one, is the need to improve the visa/immigration process for Chinese visitors, investors and educationalists. Thirdly, we need to increase and improve the opportunities that Scottish children have to learn Chinese languages, the use of which will become an important relationship-building exercise and will facilitate understanding in both directions between the two countries. We also need to help and encourage Scottish schools at primary and secondary level to twin with schools in China. In addition, we need to support small and medium-sized enterprises in establishing business links with China. We have a good track record with large organisations on a global level, but the small and medium-sized enterprises that find it hard to finance trips to China and to do the kind of research that is required represent a real challenge. The creation of a web page, Twitter and Facebook environment to encourage cross-fertilisation of ideas among Scottish entrepreneurs and to provide a connection with the Chinese audience would be an important way of placing the brand of Scotland at the forefront of everyone’s minds. Finally, in the year ahead, in which we hope that the homecoming will be a success for Scotland, why would the Government not want to consider a homecoming for Chinese students who have studied here successfully in previous decades and who still love our country, to encourage them to return to Scotland and bring with them a knowledge of where China is today? I hope that it is not so much a case of whether we should do those things, but when we do them. According to VisitScotland, the number of Chinese visitors to Scotland is continuing to rise exponentially. The Scottish Parliament’s European and External Relations Committee has agreed that the establishment of a direct air link is vital. If we want to strengthen our economic links with China, we must also ensure that we minimise the barriers that exist to co-operation and trade. At meetings of the cross-party group on China, I regularly hear stories of Chinese businesses that are looking to invest in Scotland, but which are deterred by difficulties with visas and immigration. Although I acknowledge that those are complicated issues that are reserved to the UK Parliament, the Scottish Government must examine all available avenues to minimise barriers to trade and to encourage our colleagues at UK level to resolve some of those issues. The financial figures from the past few years illustrate how important trade with China is to Scotland. In the first half of 2012, trade between Scotland and China was worth almost £800 million, which represented growth of 14.4 per cent from the previous year. As well as including traditional goods such as salmon and whisky, exports now extend to chemical-related products and machinery and transport equipment, exports of which have increased by more than 40 per cent. The fields of telecommunications, science and technology, information and communication technology and renewable energy are all areas in which China seeks to expand. Even in the global economic crisis, there has been an expansion of foreign banks in China, to the extent that their profits have increased by 109 per cent. That further illustrates the importance of Scotland’s relationship with China. We must also bear it in mind that, over the past 5,000 years of history, China has contributed a wealth of literature, art, philosophy and science to the world. China is on its way to becoming the largest economic power in the history of the world. Its progress is built on a number of defining values that we should bear in mind. First, the needs of the group and society are prioritised above the individual’s needs. Secondly, Chinese people seek to ensure harmony—they pursue unity and common ground while simultaneously allowing differences. Thirdly, on the basis of peaceful co-operation and co-existence, there is mutual non-interference in each other’s affairs. It is important that we appreciate those differences. Over the next 50 years, the challenge for China is to develop harmony in its communities while responding to the ever-growing demand for consumer goods and enhanced standards of living. There are 150 million people in China living below the poverty levels that one would deem acceptable. Forty years ago, 100 Chinese students came to the UK. Last year, British universities had 65,000 Chinese students, of whom 7,000 were in Scotland. We need to encourage Chinese students to come to Scotland to study while increasing and improving the opportunities for Scottish children to learn Chinese languages. The five-year plan for China offers opportunities for Scotland to deliver. China seeks to enter a world community. We should engage in that ambition and develop a healthy relationship that goes in the right direction. We must play our part in ensuring that China joins Scotland in a modern world. I encourage the Government and the minister to note the points that I have made, which I hope they will actively pursue in the year ahead.

Unusually, I begin by thanking Mike Russell, who introduced the notion of a “fact-free universe”. That is a useful context in which to consider some of the comments that I will make on the justice proposals. Today, Mr MacAskill took to the radio to announce, yet again, that we had “a record number of police officers”, and insisted that the Scottish Government is “making Scotland safer”. On the second point, I have yet to hear anyone on the streets of Scotland shout, “I need help! Get me the Government!” More important, on the first point, is that police numbers fell by 172 in the previous quarter and are now at their lowest level for almost two years, and the chief constable of Police Scotland is warning of possible cuts to come. In addition, Mr MacAskill failed to acknowledge the almost 1,000 police staff who have been let go by police authorities, with the prospect of more going in the coming months, and he failed to recognise that police officers have been forced off front-line duties to cover the support-staff deficit. Many officers now spend their time in offices, dealing with recruitment issues and administration in order to ensure that Mr MacAskill can get back his record number. Nevertheless, some of the Scottish Government’s proposals have been described as populist and have been welcomed by elements of the media. They might be easily pleased; I think that the proposals look tired and lack bite. What do we have here? As Annabelle Ewing has acknowledged, much in the programme is long overdue. For instance, although I very much welcome the airgun legislation, the fact is that families have been waiting for it for six years.

It is also fair to acknowledge that the Government opposed changes to those powers. What we have had is six years of promises. At last we are seeing some action. Scrapping early release would also be a good move, but Mr MacAskill’s bill is aimed at a very tiny proportion of offenders and is simply not enough. I have a letter from the Scottish Prison Service to a victim’s family, indicating that the family is not entitled to be informed on every occasion on which a prisoner is released into the community and that the Prison Service has—rightly—a duty to treat prisoners humanely. It is time that this Government faced up to its duty to treat victims and witnesses with the same sense of duty. Unfortunately, I do not believe that the current proposals meet that criterion. In the scrap metal licensing proposals, there is no mention of the need to ensure that cash transactions are banned, which would remove the profit motive for thieves and vandals. In their current state, the proposals are half a solution, even though both the cabinet secretary and the Lord Advocate have spoken warmly of the need to deal with the problem. The fact is that it took three days of commuter disruption in Aberdeen to finally produce from Mr MacAskill a half-baked response that just does not cut it. What could Mr MacAskill have done? I have some suggestions. We could have had better asset recovery legislation and legislation on human trafficking. Regulation of the security industry, which is important ahead of the Commonwealth games, has been delayed since 2007. There could have been new lobbying legislation to prevent corruption in politics, efforts to tackle alcohol abuse, reform of criminal verdicts, and the criminalisation of the purchase of sex. Tackling those issues will help to protect those in our society who are most at risk, but they have all been ignored as the Government fails to provide real substance. Where is the vision for today’s Scotland among the First Minister’s promises of mañana tomorrow? I have said that the proposals look tired. In fact, the cabinet secretary's bag of promises looks empty and it seems the seven-year itch is just around the corner. The proposed licensing bill might improve and extend some local authority powers with regard to taxis and private hire cars and lap-dancing clubs, but the false assertion that the First Minister's Government has stabilised the prison population and is on course to reduce it flies in the face of reality. As we speak, the prison population is up to 8,100 and the Government’s own forecasts indicate that it will rise further to 9,500 by 2020. The Government is not taking action to deal with the real problems of reoffending and meaningful activity in prison; Audit Scotland has identified that very problem, saying that reoffending, which is stuck at around 30 per cent, should be dealt with. We know what improvements are necessary. A strategy was set out in 2006, and it needs to be delivered. What about major improvements that have been implemented in the justice system? There has been a significant backlog of cases in our dedicated domestic abuse courts, a rise in the number of sex crimes, a risk of further court delays through closures, and growing demand for better protection for witnesses. A tired Government is running out of time and, evidently, out of ideas. Scottish Labour will provide the evidence in support of our union of nations, but we will also continue to challenge this myopic Government and force it to address people’s real needs.

5. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to reduce the number of assaults against police officers. (S4F-01493)

No worker in Scotland should go to work expecting to be assaulted. Although crime in Scotland is at a 37-year low, statistics published this month indicate a significant increase in the number of assaults on police officers in the past 37 years. Indeed, it is estimated that the increase is over 50 per cent. This Government needs a plan for reducing the number of assaults on police officers and other workers who serve the public—can we see it?

5. To ask the First Minister what impact the recent decision by three senior executives to leave the Scottish Police Authority will have on its information technology strategy. (S4F-01491)

The First Minister talked previously of “creative tension” across Scottish policing. With the loss of the head of finance, of the head of governance and strategy and of the chief executive officer—the accountable officer for the Scottish Police Authority—it is clear that the factors that lie behind the crisis are more than “creative” tensions. Will this week’s meeting of senior officials to reorganise governance responsibilities across Police Scotland and the SPA finally indicate that the Government is coming to grips with this taxpayer-funded £1 billion organisation and deliver an efficient single police force?

Many members will be pleased that my voice is on the verge of collapsing, but I hope that I will maintain it for six minutes. The cabinet secretary introduced the debate by indicating that the bill seeks to place “victims and witnesses at the centre of the criminal justice system.” The evidence that the Justice Committee received from victims and witnesses was harrowing in identifying that, for many of them, their experience reflected almost a pass-the-parcel attitude to dealing with the problems that they faced and the challenges that they saw in obtaining necessary information. A picture emerged that reflected a justice system that is focused on solving administrative challenges, but a real question remained about whether victims’ and witnesses’ needs are being properly answered. There was also a challenge in respect of an absence of monitoring the standards that are expected and the services that are delivered. Questions are therefore pending, and they require answers. One hopes that, at the end of our debate, the minister will be able to give us some comfort in supplying those answers. Is the Government confident that the various services have the ability to update the system accurately and in a timely fashion so that victims and witnesses can access that knowledge? Certainly as far as the police service was concerned in its evidence to the committee, the answer is no. It has neither the systems nor the support necessary to be properly aware of the current situation with regard to the cases that it deals with—likewise, I doubt that many others in the system are able to do that either. From the point of view of a witness or a victim, they face not only the police but family liaison officers, Victim Support Scotland, the victim information service, procurators fiscal, Crown Office advocates, court administrators and lawyers. It is a difficult environment for a member of the public to face. The cabinet secretary indicated that he would be happy to engage with COPFS in relation to road traffic deaths and road traffic accidents generally. Families want information from the authorities about deaths and serious injuries that family members have suffered, and I hope that the minister will be able to give us some comfort in relation to that specific issue. Allusions have been made to the difficulties that the police might have in supplying victims with an interviewer of a specified gender. As indicated previously, I think that it is important that, when services cannot provide what is expected of them, a full explanation should be supplied timeously so that there is transparency on why the services are not supplied and what alternatives are arranged in those circumstances. Victims may be uncomfortable and distressed about receiving money from offenders, so the victim surcharge payment and compensation orders might not always be appropriate. The minister should give us some indication about whether victims and/or witnesses will be consulted in relation to such arrangements. In addition, the victim surcharge does not appear to do much for the victim per se. Indeed, the list of services that may be provided from the use of such surcharge payments includes the cleaning of a crime scene, the provision of very basic requirements of the victim and some other peripheral issues, but it does not deal with the long-term needs of a victim after the process has been completed. Much has been said about the use of the nomenclature “victims” and “complainers”. Many in the chamber will not be surprised that I did not contribute particularly to that debate. It is important that families know that, when they have been victimised as a result of a crime or an offence, that status will be acknowledged. Nevertheless, the balance of ensuring a proper trial and the balance of justice also need to be adhered to. Much has been said about Scottish Labour’s position that there is a need for a victims commissioner. It is appropriate that Jenny Marra should raise that issue, as it was referred to by individual witnesses who sought someone to act on their behalf to ensure that services are delivered and it was discussed at some length within the Justice Committee. Scottish Labour wants victims and witnesses to receive the services and information that they deserve. We want victims of serious crime to be given the right to be heard by those involved in sentencing, bail decisions and parole proceedings in the future. I look forward to hearing from the minister in that regard, and I will support the motion at decision time.

In his question, Mr Findlay raised real concerns about the proposals. Those concerns must be dealt with. Having said that, I welcome the cabinet secretary’s declared intention to clarify the 2010 act and to provide a statutory basis for what is required when reviewing a local authority’s closure proposal. I also welcome, particularly from a South Scotland perspective, the cabinet secretary’s acknowledgement that schools can be fundamental to the social and economic make-up of rural communities.

I am coming to the question now, Presiding Officer. The cabinet secretary acknowledges that it might be best to refer a case to a new, independent decision-making body. When does the ministerial decision-making process enter a final outcome, and how can we hold ministers to account, democratically, for that decision ?

The issue of refugees and asylum seekers in our country can cause significant concerns, which has always surprised me. As a nation, we are proud of our country, we celebrate our culture and we enjoy a quality of life that is second to none. How fortunate we are that we do not have to flee our country and seek refuge in another country because of war, oppression or persecution. Which one of us would choose to send a child of ours to strangers in a distant land in the hope that the child would be well received, loved and supported? In that light, as well as recognising the significant contribution that refugees make to Scotland, it is important to acknowledge that allowing people to come to Scotland to escape torture and tyranny is the duty of a compassionate and responsible nation. I believe that Scotland is such a nation. In addition to the moral obligation that we have to refugees, it is vital that refugees, particularly children, are well looked after for however long they choose to stay here. As almost half all refugees are under 18, it is clear that the Scottish guardianship service is a vital and worthwhile initiative. I welcome the Scottish Government’s announcement that £200,000 will be allocated to the service over the next three years. I hope that the scheme will provide care and support to vulnerable children. It must be an absolutely terrifying experience for a child to arrive alone in a new country. Often, such children have no knowledge of Scotland, our systems and support services or our language. We must bear in mind the fact that the authorities in their homelands—including the police—are not always seen in a positive light. The difficulty that such children experience might be magnified by the fact that many of them are fleeing war zones, persecution or physical and mental abuse. Another concern is that a significant number of young refugees might have been trafficked, with many living in fear of traffickers who would force them into the sex industry or drugs industry to provide cheap labour. We must ensure that all young people are sufficiently looked after for however long they are here. Police Scotland has an important role to play. Continued work on identifying, targeting and prosecuting traffickers is vital in reducing the number of trafficked people in Scotland. The number of prosecutions for trafficking in Scotland is very low, and more needs to be done to ensure that victims understand the nature of exploitation, so that they can act as witnesses. We need to reassure victims that they will be safe and protect them from any potential repercussions that they might fear suffering from traffickers. Since its establishment, the Scottish guardianship service has been designed to ensure that young refugees are better supported during their experience of immigration and better informed about the welfare system. As well as developing a model of practice that is centred on the child’s interests, the service is designed to encourage co-operation and communication among the agencies so as to provide better information and support. Aberlour Child Care Trust and the Scottish Refugee Council, which are the two primary partners in the guardianship service, agree that vulnerable young people who enter the UK as refugees need support and assistance in navigating the often complex processes and systems that they face. A particular challenge comes from the added barriers of language and cultural differences. The children’s charity Barnardo’s Scotland further supports that view and has added its backing to the guardianship service. Providing young asylum seekers and refugees with support and enabling them to access the assistance that they need are paramount if we are to represent ourselves as a responsible and compassionate society. The appointment of an individual to act as a young person’s guardian means that the young person has a single point of contact throughout the asylum and immigration process, which offers a vulnerable child continuity, stability and the establishment of trust in a most challenging circumstance. Having the guardian explain to the child in understandable terms the process that they are going through makes the experience less daunting and overwhelming for them. I will highlight two issues in the system. The first is the fact that separated children who are seeking asylum are processed in the same way as adults. The second is that, unlike England and Wales, Scotland does not afford young asylum seekers the official status of children in need. If we can address those issues, combined with the Scottish guardianship service, Scotland will have a programme for dealing with young refugees of which we can be proud.

From the briefings that have been provided, the official status of children in need seems to be a key issue for those who have deep experience of the processes. I invite the minister to revisit that and, if there is a gap, to deal with it. I support the motion and hope that the Government will continue its efforts to ensure that Scotland provides a safe place for asylum seekers and refugees.

In light of the minister’s response, will he undertake to revisit the proposals in the member’s bill consultation “Shifting the Culture”, which Dr Simpson and I published last year, which addressed many of the issues to which he has alluded?

13. To ask the Scottish Government whether it considers that the individual patient treatment request system meets the needs of patients. (S4O-02244)

I do not take it personally, Presiding Officer.

I am pleased that, in his response, the cabinet secretary acknowledges that Mrs Rankin did not receive the service that she deserved. Can he now identify the means by which she can achieve justice and obtain the treatment that she requires from the NHS to combat her bowel cancer?

I speak in support of Patricia Ferguson’s amendment to the motion. I welcome the minister’s commitment earlier to build further the links between sport hubs and schools. Encouraging young people to participate in sport is not just about nurturing the star athletes of tomorrow; getting children involved in sport in the long term ensures that we create a healthier and happier society for us all. Unfortunately, Scotland has a reputation—fair or not—for an unhealthy lifestyle, particularly with regard to food, alcohol, cigarettes and inactivity. With the 2012 Olympics still fresh in our minds and the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup coming to Scotland next year, there has never been a better opportunity to encourage people to get involved in sport and enjoy a healthy life. As proposed in Scottish Labour’s 2011 manifesto, I believe that that should start with ensuring that every pupil in Scotland enjoys at least two hours of physical education a week. I would welcome it if the Scottish Government delivered on its 2007 commitment to ensure that all pupils receive two hours of PE a week and not just, as in some areas, two periods in secondary school. I am disheartened by reports that 16 per cent of primary schools are still not meeting their target. I hope that the minister will ensure that that changes. I acknowledge the Scottish Government’s efforts to encourage young people to get active with the implementation of the take life on scheme and the provision of free swimming lessons for pupils from deprived areas. That is a tremendous development. However, we all agree that more can still be done. I believe that the best and most effective way to increase youth participation in sport is to target support at schools, teachers and—as previous speakers have alluded to—the helpers who, often acting in a voluntary capacity, support them in delivering sport. There are countless opportunities to get school pupils more involved in sport, both as part of the physical education curriculum and in external sports teams and groups. The main barrier appears to be a lack of clear information, support and guidance for teachers who seek to access funding. From personal experience, I know that the costs involved simply in running a school football team can be very significant. Hiring transport to attend games each week can cost hundreds of pounds, without taking into account the other costs involved.

Mr Keir will not be surprised to know that I have limited knowledge of that example, but I can tell him that, day and daily, schools throughout Scotland need to utilise bus companies either to play an away game or to receive a team from elsewhere for a home match. As I alluded to, those costs need to be met by many, if not all, schools across Scotland. Often, teachers who voluntarily give up their time to run clubs and teams become the victim of their own success, because costs and time commitments escalate. We must ensure that teachers who are willing and able to provide pupils with the opportunities to get involved in sport are sufficiently supported and encouraged. In many secondary schools, the senior school leavers could—as some currently do—play a part in motivating younger pupils to become involved in sport. Perhaps the minister could consider whether there is an opportunity for senior school leavers to be employed on a part-time basis back in their home schools to assist educators accordingly. If children participate in two hours of PE each week, they are more likely to get involved in sports clubs and organisations outside the school. With more and more people working in office environments these days—although the reduction in exposure to dangerous physical working conditions is obviously positive—it is more important than ever that we ensure that people develop an active lifestyle that they can maintain throughout their adult life. The need for that is illustrated by the fact that only 45 per cent of men and 33 per cent of women in Scotland currently meet the Government’s targets for a healthy level of physical activity. Participation in sport is about far more than ensuring that our national teams can compete with the world’s best. As well as allowing children from all backgrounds to socialise together in a healthy, fun environment, such participation improves social skills, reduces health risks, takes the pressure off our national health system and teaches discipline, teamwork and hard work to those who might otherwise fall outside the system. In conclusion, I remind members, if they need reminding, that literally hundreds and thousands of young people compete each week for the Cameronian cup, the Scottish shield and the British cup championships. In addition, dance teams from almost every school in Scotland send girls to participate in the Scottish national dance championships. We should laud and encourage such developments for the future. I look forward to a healthy future for Scotland.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has had with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice regarding the allocation of Barnett consequentials to Police Scotland. (S4O-02169)

In that context, did the cabinet secretary and his colleagues give any consideration to the allocation of a portion of the accumulated police reserves to the Scottish Police Authority to support the organisation in managing its initial budgetary challenges, in particular in implementing the national information technology systems that are so necessary to enable a single police service to operate in Scotland?

The NHS faces many challenges, to which it often responds by delivering positive outcomes. However, chronic pain has been and still is the ghost in the machine. Affecting thousands of Scots, chronic pain—and sometimes also severe pain—results in long-term suffering for patients, apparently without meaningful support or treatment. The presence of campaigners in the chamber reflects the dire need for support that exists in the real world. Chronic pain—pain that continues over an extended period—is a blight on the lives of thousands of Scots, and our debate must focus on how to support the individuals and families who are affected. As the cabinet secretary acknowledged, it ought to go without saying that Scots who suffer from chronic pain should have access to the full range of available treatments here in Scotland, yet too many patients are being forced to travel to other parts of the UK for support. Scots not getting access to the treatment that they need has been a running theme in the chamber over the past few weeks and, unfortunately, the postcode lottery of chronic pain services means that that theme is likely to continue today. The cabinet secretary acknowledged that some 800,000 Scots, including 70,000 children, suffer from chronic pain. To obtain some relief a lucky few—if we can call them lucky—have to travel 400 miles or more for specialist treatment. The cost of sending some 20 people a year to Bath in Somerset for treatment at a specialist unit runs to some £250,000. Surely that money would be better spent on providing treatment here in Scotland, and I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to resolve that matter. I am concerned about how the Scottish Government plans to continue treatment arrangements such as those in Bath in an independent Scotland, but perhaps that is a debate for another day. Healthcare Improvement Scotland’s “Update Report on Scottish Pain Management Services” reported that 75 per cent of the population now have access to a pain management programme. However, the report has been widely discredited—as has been mentioned—with the true statistics showing that barely 64 per cent of Scots have access to a pain management programme. Waiting times are also significantly longer than those claimed. Dealing with chronic pain is hard enough without the Government massaging the figures and hiding the scale of the problem from the public. However, the HIS report exposed the significant variations in treatment across Scotland and noted that the majority of NHS boards provide community-based pain services, not clinician-led services. At the moment, those who suffer from chronic pain face a postcode lottery for access to day clinics and, if they require specialist treatment, they face that 800-mile—or more—round trip to Bath. That seems ludicrous, with the travel causing additional grief and stress for the sufferers. Of course, we must not ignore the fact that chronic pain is generally not an ailment in itself; it is often an accompanying symptom of illness or injury. The Government must ensure that root problems are catered for and dealt with by staff who understand the problems. We must achieve a balance between providing care and treatment for the underlying causes, such as arthritis, cancer and multiple sclerosis, while offering dedicated medical support to deal with the resulting chronic pain. It is important to acknowledge the Scottish Government’s promises and give credit to Alex Neil for his pledge to improve the specialist care that is on offer to Scots who suffer from chronic pain. I close by commending the work of the cross-party group on chronic pain, particularly that of the co-conveners Jackie Baillie, John Wilson and Jackson Carlaw. They have acknowledged that minor improvements have been made during the past decade, but the well-documented major issues still need to be addressed. I hope that, in his consultation, the cabinet secretary and his colleagues will consider carefully the recommendations from all relevant organisations to ensure that those who suffer from chronic pain have access to much-needed support and treatment. I hope that he delivers action and real services in addition to his words today. The majority of feedback seems to indicate that little has changed in the 11 years since the previous parliamentary debate on chronic pain—a debate that prompted a record level of interest. I hope that today’s debate will bring a focus on effective treatment so that we can now make it happen. I support Jackie Baillie’s amendment.

As John Wilson said, our priority in any debate on energy provision must be the interests of consumers, but we must also take into account the impact on the environment. Ensuring an affordable and dependable energy supply to the general public and Scottish businesses while encouraging the provision of sustainable energy should be our paramount objective, but we should also have a focus on reducing consumption. Fergus Ewing’s motion raises some important points about electricity market reform. I welcome his announcement of intergovernmental co-operation and the concordat, but I believe that the motion concentrates too much on self-congratulation and not enough on how the Scottish Government will deal with the challenges that we continue to face. Like the majority of members, I am concerned about our dependence on one form of energy production, so I welcome the move from a reliance on fossil fuels to a more diverse renewable energy mix. A move towards renewable energy can, by its nature, only be a good thing. The Scottish Government has pledged that by 2020 100 per cent of Scotland’s energy will come from renewable sources, which will be up from 38.69 per cent currently. That is an ambitious target and I hope that ministers are not determined to achieve it at any cost. When he is dealing with the electricity market reforms, I must remind the cabinet secretary of constituents’ concerns across the south of Scotland on the impact of wind farms on local communities, their wildlife and economies. I hope that ministers will take those concerns seriously when planning the way forward on reform. The principle behind the contracts for difference policy in the UK Energy Bill, which is designed to incentivise investment in low-carbon energy, is admirable, but the lack of detailed information on that element leaves me wondering whether it has been fully thought through and is deliverable. It is worth noting that, under the current system, Scotland’s much heralded renewables market receives a third of the UK’s total investment, despite contributing around a tenth of the funds. I wonder how that funding would be replaced should SNP members get their wish next year. The principle behind localised community renewables generators is also desirable, but the Government must ensure that issues such as the costs of liability and maintenance are fully considered when they deal with market reform. Community ownership has the potential to empower local communities and offset any negative impact of developments, but it must be done with due consideration and care, and with the interests of the community at its heart. I must, again, emphasise the importance of prioritising the communities and consumers who will be most affected by the issues being discussed. One of my major concerns regarding the energy market is the apparently continual and disproportionate increase in cost to consumers. Over the past six months, each of the so-called big six energy providers, who together supply 99 per cent of UK households, have implemented price rises of between 6 and 10 per cent. An average increase of almost £300 in three years is absolutely unacceptable. With the chief executive of Ofgem, Alistair Buchanan, warning that falls in UK power production capacity are likely to lead to more energy imports and further price rises, it is essential that we act now to minimise increases and deal with the impact on business and consumer confidence in relation to affordability. It is estimated that around 30 per cent of Scottish households are currently classed as being in fuel poverty. The idea that almost a third of people are living in fuel poverty in what is supposed to be one of the most energy-rich countries in the world is frankly embarrassing. Measures such as a requirement for energy companies to place all over-75s—the most vulnerable to increases in fuel prices—on their cheapest tariff could save hundreds of pounds for millions of pensioners. There is also still a distinct lack of clarity regarding SNP plans for the regulatory regime and energy system in an independent Scotland. The reform of the electricity market must be done transparently and openly so that consumers and providers alike know exactly where they stand. The UK Energy Bill fails to adequately address the recent escalation in energy bills and the on-going threat of fuel poverty, and it does not include sufficient measures to reduce electricity demand. I hope that the cabinet secretary can give us some comfort in those regards.

Following the recent media coverage that exposed just how nasty, offensive and vitriolic elements of the debate on independence have become—especially online—I am pleased that today’s debate has reflected mutual respect and consideration and minimal conflict. As many other members do, I favour the extension of the franchise to 16 and 17-year-olds, in all elections. I regret that the proposed extension will apply solely to the referendum and that the registration process for under-18s has therefore been rushed. I hope that the concerns that members have expressed in that context will be properly addressed in the time that remains. I harbour concerns that under-18s will not be in a position to vote in an informed manner. As part of my work in South Scotland, I often visit schools and speak with teachers. The general consensus among teachers, in particular among the teachers in modern studies departments—I am frightened to say this, given that there are so many modern studies teachers in the chamber—seems to be that many pupils are as yet not adequately informed or prepared for the responsibilities that come with voting.

I am grateful to Patricia Ferguson for making that point. It saves me from making a similar one later on. There is no doubt that there will be substantial pressure on young people to adhere to others’ views. One would hope that allowing those who are beyond 16 but under 18 to vote will allow them to play their part fully as we go towards the independence referendum. The cabinet secretary indicated in her speech that she believes that she could survive a legal challenge relating to extending the franchise to people who are serving custodial sentences. I would have hoped and expected that she would want to do the right and just thing, and not solely what she can get away with in respect of the ECHR. During my police service, I dealt with countless prisoners, who were in custody for a huge variety of crimes, and my experiences have led me to the view that those who are in prison should not be subjected to a blanket ban on participation in the electoral system. It was mentioned earlier that Scotland is part of a very small group of European countries—the group includes Armenia, Bulgaria, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Liechtenstein and Russia—that impose such restrictions. It seems strange to me that the line that we use to determine the franchise is a custodial sentence, no matter whether the person is spending weeks in prison for shoplifting or something similar, or a life sentence for murder. I therefore believe that prisoners who are serving short sentences for less serious offences—we can debate and determine the exact nature and length of those sentences—should be allowed to participate in all elections in Scotland. I also believe that, once they are granted a vote, individual prisoners should be made responsible for registering to vote and for arranging for their vote to be submitted, and that it should not be left to the prison authorities to do that on their behalf. My final point relates to my concerns about the Government’s position following the result of next year’s referendum. I hope and believe that the majority will vote against separation from the rest of the UK, but if Scotland votes to separate, although I will be extremely disappointed—I do not believe that that would be a positive step—I would accept the will of the Scottish people and endeavour to make Scotland the best place possible, whatever our relationship with the rest of the UK. I wonder whether SNP members and members of the Government will make the same pledge and state their intentions if Scotland were to vote to remain part of the United Kingdom. I find it particularly concerning that, in the past, some nationalist members have stated their desire to hold another referendum if the result of the first is not to their liking. It has been said: “If we don’t get enough votes, then I believe we would go for another referendum, especially if it’s close. It would be unfair to the people of Scotland if it’s close to tell them that it’s finished.” It is not Brigadoon that we are dealing with. There must come a point at which we recognise the consensus that is reached by the voters in Scotland and we accept their will. I hope that all members will offer assurances that they will accept the result of next year’s referendum and will subsequently prioritise the best interests of the people of Scotland.

The First Minister might remember that it is now 10 years since I briefed him and other MPs at Westminster on the need for the legislation. He will also know that his own annual Scottish strategic assessment of the business of serious organised crime identifies a turnover of more than £1 billion for organised crime. In light of that, is he satisfied that an average asset recovery of £8 million a year is sufficient, or will he commit to a further review of the operation of the 2002 act to deliver improvements in the results for future years and greatly increase asset recovery?

I acknowledge the speeches from all members thus far and I associate myself with many of the comments that have been made. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s indication—as I understood it—that he would welcome cross-party discussions outwith the chamber to identify an appropriate way forward. That is a productive way to look at where we are and to identify future delivery in the community justice system. I agree with many of the comments that have been made, particularly by Labour colleagues, that we would have benefited from having sight of a report on the responses, as we might have been better placed to offer strong and, I hope, educated views about the various options that are being considered. I hope that, in the time left to me, I can bring a slightly different view to the debate. As regards the size of the problem that we are trying to address, the prison population—in spite of annual declarations from the Government—continues to rise. In 2011-12, the daily average was 8,178. In 2012-13, that rose to 8,300, and the forecast from those who have knowledge of such matters indicates that it is feasible that 9,500 prisoners will be in our prisons in 2020-21. There is an endemic, systemic problem that needs to be addressed, not only from the point of view of the human tragedy that it reflects, but in terms of the public investment and finance that are necessary to care for offenders in our system. As regards reconviction rates, Audit Scotland reported—I think fairly—that progress on reoffending has been fairly static. Reconviction rates were 31.8 per cent in 1997-98, and 30.1 per cent in 2009-10—a reduction of 1.7. While that is welcome, it does not reflect progress, in the wider sense of that word. At the same time, the Scottish Prison Service, the Government and community justice authorities spent £419 million in 2010-11 dealing with people convicted in the courts, but less than a third of that—£128 million—was spent on cutting reoffending. The prison population continues to increase and the cost to wider society of reoffending is estimated by Audit Scotland at about £3 billion per year—without even considering the impact on victims and witnesses. Audit Scotland also noted that the reconviction rates are significantly affected by changes in the criminal justice system and by how the Scottish Government chooses to classify cases. That is illustrated by the fact that the reconviction rates do not include people who have reoffended after receiving early intervention measures such as police fixed-penalty notices and the like. It is important that we have a debate and decide the way forward. It is a pressing issue. However, of the 8,300 prisoners that I mentioned earlier, we should bear it in mind that more than 70 per cent are classified as functionally illiterate and innumerate. Unless we find a way to deliver purposeful activity—I prefer to call it “activity with purpose”, and that purpose should be to educate and provide the facilities that will give prisoners opportunities as they leave the prison environment—we will always slam into a wall of self-defeat.

Yes. When a prisoner is in custody 24/7, there are always avenues for delivery, if there is the will to deliver, the necessary support, the health interventions and the whole panoply of services that can make a difference. That will give the young person mentioned earlier who finds himself or herself in custody the opportunity to reconsider. Like other members of the Justice Committee, I visited prisons to gather information. As someone who knows something about the system, I was shocked to learn from a prison officer that a prisoner who leaves one of our establishments—a man who has served his sentence—is guaranteed only three nights in a sleeping bag in a homeless persons unit as part of our society’s homelessness provision. Given the hundreds of millions of pounds that we dedicate to community justice, that does not seem to reflect the linked-up services that we should seek to deliver in the future and which might work in reducing reoffending. The option that men often take in those circumstances is not to demean themselves by accepting the sleeping bag. They are then left to the vagaries of life on the streets of our cities and towns. It is no surprise that they return to where they came from. Much has been said about the sheer panoply of services that are involved. The key to deciding the way forward is ensuring that, whatever our solution is—A, B, C or the pick and mix of option D—accountability for what we spend and the results that are achieved will be at the kernel of whether we can trust things. The role of the third or voluntary sector is vital, because it has the commitment, the expertise and, with people such as those in the Robertson Trust behind it, the finance to help to deliver in this important area.

Who decides the allocation of cashback funds? What criteria are applied in deciding on the allocation? Do the criteria ensure proportional allocation across Scotland or allocations to the areas that are most affected by organised crime, or are some other criteria used?

I am fortunate to speak after Graeme Dey, and it is right that I acknowledge that having dealt with the media—both editors and journalists—for over 30 years, on only a handful of occasions did I ever feel let down by those with whom I engaged. That said, we should have a system that creates a culture that enables the press to act in a responsible manner and which ensures transparency and accountability, so that the media and the free press are a force for good in British society. The press should act as a watchdog on public life and public administration; they should provide accurate information to the public and a forum for public discussion. However, there should also be an opportunity for arbitration on disputed stories and a means to put things right. Unfortunately, elements of the free press in recent times have failed in their responsibility to uphold those duties to the highest standard. The old adage, “Power corrupts; absolute power corrupts absolutely,” has borne fruit yet again. While it is unfair to tar the entire industry with the same brush, it would be accurate to say that a significant section of the media has not acted in a manner that we would deem acceptable. However, we should not pass by without acknowledging that some elements of the police, public servants, politicians and others have also failed to maintain integrity and honesty in their approach to the media. No doubt members of the media with power, influence and no slight financial clout have led the way to the debacle and crisis that we now face. It is absolutely clear that the media cannot continue to behave in the manner in which it has done in past years. We must not lose sight of why the Leveson inquiry was established two years ago: to ensure that immoral media practices such as phone hacking are not repeated. Now that the dust is beginning to settle, it is worth taking a moment to consider the full magnitude of the situation that led us to this debate. The scandal of the press directly impacted on people across British society, from celebrities and the royal family to ordinary people who were often the very victims of tragedy and deserved better, such as the Dowler and McCann families. It was a scandal that resulted in the death of one of Britain’s oldest and most read newspapers and which brought an industry meant to protect the public into disrepute. I do not support tight regulation of the press that would limit its freedom, because I believe that a free press is a luxury that we are very fortunate to have and which, by and large, serves us well. However, a balance must be struck between regulation to ensure responsible practices, and freedom of speech and fair comment. It is important to recognise that Lord Justice Leveson’s proposal in no way suggested that the Government should have power over what the media publishes, nor that there should be any political control over the press’s ability to ensure accountability and transparency. It will, however, ensure that members of the public are protected from improper and unacceptable behaviour by elements of the media. That role was previously part of the Press Complaints Commission’s function, although the commission failed to deliver on it. The lesson that we should learn from that failure is that a process is only as valuable and impactful as the people who administer it. The continuing wrangling between the UK Government and the media emphasises the importance of getting this right. Although a significant number of newspapers and media outlets oppose the proposals that have been agreed by all the main political parties, the industry’s proposed alternative is so far removed from Lord Leveson’s recommendations that I do not believe that it would be sufficient to address the issues at hand, which are about the misconduct of the press. By and large, I am content that the system that is to be implemented offers the best possible solution for all concerned, subject to appropriate arrangements being put in place to take account of Scots law. Whatever the nature of the final system that is implemented, it is important that we agree that it should be appropriate for all the United Kingdom. In this chamber and throughout Scotland, we have a propensity to debate the constitutional arrangements that bind us, but—this is in no way an attempt at political point scoring—I think that we can all agree that, whether or not Scotland votes for independence next year, we will continue to read the same newspapers, watch the same current affairs programmes on television and visit the same news websites. It is therefore vital that we have a cohesive, single system in place to regulate the press, whether the medium is produced in Scotland and read elsewhere or vice versa. I am pleased that the Parliament has been able to achieve general agreement on a solution that deals with public concerns about the business of journalism while protecting a free press. In the end, we need to have confidence that those who have the power and influence to take the necessary action to deliver integrity in the system of governance have the courage to take that action. I welcome the cross-party agreement in the Scottish Parliament on the proposals, and I support Fiona Hyslop’s motion.

We have heard a great deal this afternoon in the abstract about delivery of justice and the business of the courts. It is obvious that the Cabinet Secretary for Justice is having some difficulty when he creates a heat shield using the Lord President and the chief executive of the Scottish Court Service and says that they produced the proposals and that he merely feels duty bound to see them through to a conclusion. In South Scotland, the proposals will affect a great number of courts and communities. Peebles, Duns, Haddington, Jedburgh, Kirkcudbright, Lanark, Selkirk and Stranraer will all be affected by the proposals, which seems to me to be more like judicial vandalism than thoughtful reform.

Yes—but it will be affected by on-going proposals and their knock-on effects. In analysing the economics behind the proposals, I note that the closure of Duns sheriff court will save £21,000 per year, that the closure of Peebles sheriff court will save £17,000 per year and—lo and behold—that the closure of Annan JP court will save a princely £8,000 per year. I suggest that the issue is not about the business of the courts or about the Scottish Court Service; it is about people. It is about victims and witnesses and, indeed, accused people going to the courts and seeking justice. As someone who has had the unfortunate experience of having given evidence at every sitting of the High Court in Glasgow for 11 years, on one occasion for two days, I can tell members that that is not a welcome experience. Having also given evidence in courts across Scotland, I can say that the experience in the sheriff and justice of the peace courts can be just as torturous. In 40 years, I have never been met outside the court by a witness who said, “Thank you, Mr Pearson, for that wonderful experience. If you ever need me again, please phone.” Indeed, the responses have been somewhat otherwise. I am therefore concerned that the changes will have a detrimental effect on vulnerable people and people who are disabled, elderly, or suffer in poverty. Travelling an extra 18 miles or more to a court might seem to be insignificant to many of us who have cars, but for people who rely on public transport, it could prove to be extremely difficult. I examined the situation at Duns court to see what would happen there. It would mean an additional 30-mile journey to Jedburgh and it would mean catching a bus at 7.30 am to be at Jedburgh in time for court, with the likelihood that, on many occasions, the witnesses will share the transport with the very people about whom they seek to complain or give evidence against. That is a significant journey to spend in the company of people who they would much rather not see. The Scottish Government has heralded the introduction of live video links and conferencing networks across the country, particularly for the “northern courts”, as they are described. The history of that is not good. We have been able to use videoconferencing for more than a decade in Scotland and, even after questioning the cabinet secretary a number of times in committee, not much seems to be happening in that regard. Indeed, only yesterday at the Justice Committee, Murdo MacLeod QC, and Peter Lockhart indicated many difficulties that severely limit the ability of lawyers and judges to question witnesses effectively and obtain justice for the courts. SNP members will claim that they have simply accepted the recommendations that have been made by the Scottish Court Service and the Lord President, but more remains to be done. We need to think about the witnesses and victims who need to use the service, and who rely on local delivery of that service. Whatever we try to do in public life, we should take services to the public rather than causing the public inconvenience at one of the most stressful times in their lives by asking them to travel to a strange environment and make them feel that they are vulnerable and at risk. Many of them do not seek that experience. I am concerned about the potential impact of the recommendations. I worry about the impact that they will have on getting witnesses to come forward to offer their evidence. I hope that the back-bench members of the Scottish National Party who can have an impact at the Justice Committee will ensure that the proposals are voted down, or will find the means to vote for a proper consultation and some reform for our courts in the future. I support Lewis Macdonald’s motion.

I am sure that members welcome the drop in reported poisonings of birds of prey, but I am concerned that there has been no decline in other forms of raptor persecution. The Wildlife and Natural Environment (Scotland) Act 2011 introduced vicarious liability, to combat raptor persecution. Will the minister indicate what the next steps will be? Now that Police Scotland has been established, what new approaches will be introduced?

The previous speaker indicated that it is a good thing that the cabinet secretary was analysing the affordability of pensions. In our view, that indicates his concerns about whether or not budgets can support pensions in the future and about what plans need to be made to ensure that the economic environment can deliver. Why is it not sensible for us also to consider the affordability of the various services that are currently provided from the public budget and to decide whether or not the provision of those services can be paid for? When the topic for the debate was first announced, I was concerned that it had been chosen by the Scottish Government to give SNP members the opportunity to claim that their party was the champion of universal services and to advance scaremongering claims that Opposition parties want to remove services from vulnerable people and to erode the provision of the welfare state. Unfortunately, my concerns have proved justified. John Swinney has acknowledged that his budget finances are challenged. I remind him that those challenges are being faced across the western world, not solely here and, as he says, south of the border. In addition, Robert Black, the former Auditor General for Scotland, indicated: “People think it’s been tough up until now but there’s still two-thirds of the spending cuts still to be made between now and 2014. The moves being made by the Labour party in Scotland to actually at least start asking the questions I think is a good thing.” Until he made that statement, he was lauded in the chamber as a man of common sense and some vision for the future. We must be honest with the people of Scotland. Universal services are an ideal to which we aspire but, in this new world, we must also take into account affordability and necessity.

A combination of universal and targeted benefits offers the best way forward for Scotland, and it provides the best support for our most vulnerable. If we look past the promises that the Government makes, we see a gulf between its actions and words. On justice, for instance, although the SNP promised 1,000 extra police officers, it has actually allowed a cut of 977 police staff since 2010. Without doubt, that means that some recruits will have to be taken off the front line to do backroom jobs. At the same time, the Government refuses to guarantee the future of local police stations, it is attempting to close a number of local courts and we hear conflicting statements regarding police officers’ terms and conditions. Scottish Labour increased the number of police officers by 1,500, tackled antisocial behaviour and began to seize criminal assets and invest them in the areas that were hardest hit by serious violent crime. It also spent more than £10 million on closed-circuit television cameras to make Scotland’s streets safer. I understand as well as anyone that times are tough and that the economic climate will have an impact on public services, but I cannot tolerate a Government misleading people in Scotland and being dishonest with the electorate. The recent changes in legal aid provision demonstrate the contradictions in the commitment to universal services. The SNP’s universal provision now means that a citizen with a disposable income of more than £82 a week or capital of more than £750 must contribute towards the cost of their defence. Those proposals led to lawyers taking part in boycotts and protests and to them warning that innocent accused people could be incentivised to plead guilty.

Although an individual accused of their first offence could now be required to pay, figures show that between 2009 and 2012 more than 6,500 people received more than 10 grants of legal aid and far more than 100 people received more than 30 grants. There must be a balance between providing legal aid for those who require it most and ensuring that repeat offenders do not abuse the system. The hypocrisy on universal services is most clearly illustrated by the case of one of my constituents under an SNP health service that is repeatedly described as free at the point of use. My constituent suffers from bowel cancer and the only drug that doctors have found that has a positive impact on her disease is cetuximab. The drug is available to patients in the rest of the UK and in some parts of Scotland but, as a result of the current delivery of universal services, she and her family have had to pay £800 per treatment to deal with her ailment. My constituent’s case makes a mockery of the claim that healthcare in Scotland is universal and free at the point of use. It shows how much of a postcode lottery it has become. It also clearly demonstrates the gulf between what the Government promises and what it delivers. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth acknowledges that he has made choices in his budget. My constituent and many like her face the results of those choices.

The Government would far prefer to give Fred Goodwin and his like free travel at the cost of my constituent. The debate is about fairness.

We need to support those who count on our support.

Dispensing largess carelessly—

For 38 years, officers and staff from eight police forces and, more recently, the Scottish Crime and Drugs Enforcement Agency and the Scottish Police Services Authority have served the public throughout Scotland for the most part in an exemplary and professional manner. I take the opportunity to acknowledge that many have given their time—and, sometimes, their lives—selflessly, providing security and safety for others. However, recent evidence demonstrates that some senior people have failed to learn the lessons from the experience of the SPSA. I find it difficult to understand why, if matters were so clear and functions were so well understood, the Lord Advocate, the chief constable, the chair of the Scottish Police Authority, the minister and civil servants required to meet to broker some kind of outcome. Now is the moment for the Government to commit clearly—in unequivocal, unambiguous terms—to the chief constable being the one who commands and directs while the SPA provides effective governance and accountability by means of a scheme of authority or delegation. I would like to see that scheme of authority. In that regard, I look forward to the policing event in the Parliament tomorrow, which was mentioned earlier. In that context, the SNP amendment is disappointing in its tone of self-congratulation, complacent in its understanding of the pressing needs that these organisations face and lazy in its analysis of current trends in crime recording, bearing in mind the fact that America, Canada, many parts of Europe and even the cabinet secretary’s favourite—south of the border—all face significant falls in recorded crime. That observation does not detract in any way from the hard work that is done by officers and staff. It merely reinforces the point that the loss of 1,000 police staff posts has been the cost of the additional 1,000 police officers. Some of the staff who have been lost are the people who ensured that criminals are caught in a modern Scotland. They worked as civilians in forensics or financial investigation or managed, analysed and linked crime trend statistics on behalf of police officers to enable them to arrest repeat offenders at all levels. I have much to say but little time. The SPA must ensure that it fulfils its responsibilities to forensic science by creating a cutting-edge service in a world where LGC Ltd and the forensic science services are struggling. Scotland has witnessed enough bean counting in that area over the past years. The Gartcosh crime campus offers a new beginning for forensic science alongside the specialist capabilities of counterterrorism and organised crime investigators. The chief constable and the SPA should take that opportunity. The inability of current police forces to link information and intelligence systems effectively was demonstrated yet again by the Savile debacle. Ten years ago, lessons from the Soham murders pointed the way forward in that regard. Scotland was in the lead, with its Scottish intelligence database. The SPA must commit to delivering again a world-class information technology network—secure, linked and effective in its command and control operations. I look forward to proper democratic oversight of forthcoming developments, and I support the motion as amended by Lewis Macdonald’s amendment.

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government will clarify the current relationship between the Scottish Police Authority and police Scotland. (S4F-01234)

I thank the First Minister for that brief answer. In four separate interviews, the chief constable has indicated that he will be unable to maintain the 1,000 additional police officers during the forthcoming spending period, because of budgetary pressures. In addition, last night, police staff who are in Unison shared with members of the Parliament their substantial experience of job losses and insecurity. Given the evident friction between the SPA convener, Government officials and the chief constable, which has been exposed in correspondence that was belatedly released to the Justice Committee this week, is the First Minister committed to ensuring that the chief constable is appropriately empowered on human resources and finance—subject to proper accountability—to deliver on the job concerns that have been expressed by police staff and the chief constable?

1. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what developments there have been since November 2012 regarding the external screening facility. (S4O-01859)

David Stewart will realise that members are sensitive about the costs attached to such projects. Has the corporate body received an up-to-date threat assessment of the situation for which the facility was designed, and can it share with the Parliament any details of that assessment?

SNP proposals seem to focus on leaving us with one of the smallest defence budgets in Europe, at £2.5 billion, which is even smaller than Denmark’s and proportionately less than is currently spent across the UK. Does the minister seriously suggest that filling all an independent Scotland’s defence capability gaps can be furnished on the cheap? Or does he intend introducing conscription to Scotland, just as his examples of Finland and Denmark already have?

As someone who is not a member of the committee, I am delighted to be speaking in the debate. I wish the minister well in seeing his first bill through Parliament successfully. In spite of some divided opinions shared with the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and the Environment Committee in evidence sessions, we have had a largely consensual debate around the measures proposed in the bill, although with the caveat that the committee believes that the bill can and needs to be improved before it can achieve the aims set out by the Scottish Government. I have to say that I share that view. Given that the Scottish Government has recognised that it is not only achievable but desirable to strengthen the bill and given that it has already suggested some amendments for stage 2—should the bill pass stage 1—I believe that we can support the bill with a degree of confidence that it will be improved considerably by stage 2. One aspect of the bill that the committee feels needs strengthening is the provisions on illegal cockle fishing. I have a particular interest in that, not solely because of my engagement in South Scotland as a regional representative but because since the cockle-fishing ban was introduced in the Solway almost 18 months ago criminal gangs have been involved in poaching there. Those gangs have been organising the lifting of significant numbers of cockles and have often been exploiting foreign workers to get the work done. Despite that being a major problem, the police have struggled to prioritise sufficiently work to tackle it as the current legislation does not give them a sufficiency of powers to deal with it. The Scottish Government has recognised the need and the potential to strengthen the bill in that respect. I am pleased that the committee has backed the principle that the bill be improved to help deal with illegal cockle picking and has advocated that the Scottish Government discuss any possible amendments with the police and other authorities to ensure that the bill addresses the issues that officers are experiencing on the ground. The committee also advocated that the Scottish Government consider the suggestion made in evidence sessions by David McCallum, a chief inspector in Dumfries and Galloway Constabulary, that any amendment be split into two parts: the first to deal with a person found in circumstances in which it is reasonable to suspect that they intended to commit the offence; and the second to deal with those found with tools and paraphernalia from which it is reasonable to conclude that they intended to commit the offence. It is crucial that any new legislation is fit to deal with organised criminality in this context. I commend those suggestions to the committee and to the Parliament. The committee rightly noted in its report that strengthening the bill will not in itself be enough to resolve the issue of illegal cockle picking or other illegal shellfish harvesting in Scotland. It did, however, suggest that further progress could be made if the Scottish Government continued to work closely with all relevant agencies and industry bodies to develop proposals for tackling issues such as the difficulty in tracing and tracking shellfish and the documentation required to sell it both in the UK and overseas.

I concur with the member’s suggestion. Equally, however, I am sure that he would acknowledge that organised crime will seek profit wherever it can. The amendments that have been suggested are therefore essential. I hope that by working with the industry and other relevant agencies, including those engaged in money laundering investigations, and by giving the police powers to deal more effectively with illegal cockle fishing, it will be possible to shut down that avenue for criminal gangs to raise money and thereby reduce the potential for the exploitation of foreign workers in that process. I also hope that, by foiling poachers, we will ensure that there is a sustainable cockle population in the Solway. That could also help with the establishment of a fishery that is run by local fishermen who fish responsibly and that provides local jobs. The extent of the bill is such that I could not possibly cover it all in my speech. However, on the issue of sea lice, I agree with the comments that Alex Fergusson made earlier. I hope that some cognisance will be taken at stage 2 of the way in which we measure sea lice and deal with the threat that they present.

6. To ask the Scottish Government how it will ensure that college regionalisation does not result in students being unable to attend courses close to home. (S4O-01834)

In South Scotland, there are concerns from students, parents and staff in Ayrshire, Midlothian and East Lothian about what courses will be available locally. Construction and joinery students in East Lothian and Midlothian will have to travel to Granton for their courses as regionalisation at Edinburgh College is leading to each college specialising in certain subjects. If the same tack is taken at Ayrshire regional college, given the spread between the Ayr, Kilmarnock and Kilwinning campuses, students will need to travel 45 to 50 miles to access their chosen course.

That is not local provision. What guarantee can the cabinet secretary give those students that the Government reforms will not undermine their desire to learn and improve?

I congratulate Chic Brodie on securing the debate, particularly on this date. I say to those members of the public who are in the gallery for the first time that it is not unusual for George Adam to concentrate on Paisley. He never overlooks any chance to mention its name. One point that George Adam missed out is that Sir William Arrol, who has been referred to throughout the debate, is still a resident of Paisley—he lies in Woodside cemetery in Paisley. I am sure that he would turn in his grave at the prospect of his beloved home being considered for demolition. As Chic Brodie said, there is no doubt that Sir William Arrol was a giant of the 19th century. An industrialist and entrepreneur, he began work at nine years of age and went on to be a blacksmith at the mature age of 13. Something that has not been mentioned is that, thereafter, Sir William—like many young people in modern Scotland who attend college and university—went to night class to better himself. He eventually became one of Scotland’s great builders and contractors. The Forth rail bridge and the Tay rail bridge are two iconic bridges that are still in the minds of all Scots in the modern Scotland of the 21st century. The Titan crane, which was created by Sir William at a cost of £24,600, is a huge erection that still stands proud on the banks of the Clyde as a memorial to the Clyde’s ship-building history. Why should Seafield house be so important to us? It is an Italianate villa that has a number of original architectural features and a four-storey tower. It not only saw life as a private home, but went on—after Sir William’s death—to be a hospital and then the headquarters of a health board. For a man like Sir William to decide to build his house in that fashion says something about the 19th century and tells us where we have come from. The house was built using the labour of many Scottish men and women in the west of Scotland. It stands proud to this day, and it deserves to be invested in for the future. Seafield house in Ayr is interesting not only because of its design, but because of its role in the local community over time. It has become a significant building that is beloved of the local community. There is no doubt that we all fail to realise the significance of such buildings until we are in danger of losing them. The fact that Seafield house has got into its present state does not say anything about its value for the future. Scotland’s place in the world is to do with its history and the part that it played in creating the world of the future—the world that we now live in. The people of the 19th century left their mark across the globe, and there is no doubt that people from across the globe will want to come and see where that process began. If for no other reason than the place in history that Sir William has and the beauty of the building itself, which Chic Brodie mentioned, the local community needs and deserves our support in ensuring that the house has a future and will be there in another 100 years’ time.

The minister mentioned law enforcement efforts across the EU. In light of media reports indicating that those involved in the horse trade have used Scottish ports to deliver a substantial number of horses into the food chain, does the Government have a means to monitor such trade going through our ports? Was the minister aware of the development of such a supply route and has he taken any steps to initiate a high-level strategy in preparation for any criminal investigations should fraud, money laundering or the involvement of organised crime be identified?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the fairness and transparency of the individual patient treatment request system. (S4O-01770)

The guidance to which the cabinet secretary referred is dated 17 May 2010, and its key features make its direction of travel quite clear. The cabinet secretary will not be surprised that, at a recent meeting of the Health and Sport Committee, concern was expressed about the application of the guidance. My experience of being involved in cases in the system suggests that the guidance is not adhered to. Will the cabinet secretary take steps to ensure that the guidance is adhered to?

I begin by welcoming the Government’s motion on human rights and saying how pleased I am by the minister’s stated intention to support Scottish Labour’s amendment. For three years, the Scottish Human Rights Commission researched and discussed “Getting it Right? Human Rights in Scotland”. As a result of its investigations, the commission concluded that, despite progress and a relatively strong framework for human rights, Scotland needs a more systematic approach to human rights to ensure that what Scots experience is both positive and consistent. Since 2008, the commission has been working with organisations in different sectors to help to raise the level of understanding of human rights. The commission’s five strategic priorities for 2012 to 2016 are: “Empowering people to realise their rights through promoting greater awareness and respect for human rights. Supporting the implementation of human rights in practice. Improving human rights protection in Scotland through influencing law and policy. Progressing the realisation of human rights of people in Scotland and beyond through further developing our international role. Ensuring the Commission is effective, efficient, professional and accountable.” Human rights should and do reach every person and institution in Scotland. However, in a short speech it is necessary to focus on a few issues only. For today, my issues will be victims, the right to work and prisoners. It is important that the services and support network that are available to victims focus on more than merely obtaining money for victims. For victims to receive funds at a difficult time is obviously important, but they face other significant challenges as well. Help and support are required and their rights need to be respected. That is why I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government is due to introduce a victims bill shortly. In the 2011 Scottish Labour manifesto, the party committed to applying the human rights agenda to practical effect. To that end, we called for the establishment of a charter of victims rights, the establishment of a victims commissioner to champion the enablement of that charter, the widening of the scope of the victim notification scheme, work with the Scottish sentencing council to simplify the current complicated system of discounts and increase the chance of victims and others understanding sentencing and what it means and, finally, the establishment of a victims fund. In the area of the right to work, there has been considerable criticism from charities and the Scottish Human Rights Commission about the manner in which welfare reform is being undertaken by the UK Government. The consensus is that the approach is resulting in a retrogression in the realisation of human rights, particularly among vulnerable and marginalised people in Scotland. The commission believes that a human rights-based approach should inform the analysis and the responses to the economic crisis, offering an objective base for fair decision making.

It is important that we recognise that people also have a right to work, and that that right gives them a sense of well-being and an ability to play their part.

I commend the Government’s motion and will vote in support of it and of the amendment.

Will the Lord Advocate rehearse the extent of the ban that will apply to cash payments for metal? He might be aware that I lodged a motion in March last year that invited ministers to take steps to proscribe cash payments for the sale of even small amounts of metal and to ensure that payments were from credit or bank accounts.

Amendment 23 would deal with an oversight in drafting and with an element of unfairness. We often spend our time in the chamber trying to deliver fairness on behalf of Scotland’s citizens. When an accused person has been through a trial process and has been found not guilty, and when the judge refers to circumstances that suggest reservations about the conception that lay behind the prosecution, the accused can be satisfied that they leave court with their character unstained. However, their bank book will probably have been severely damaged from paying contributions towards their defence. In a progressive—and, some might think, radical—fashion, amendment 23 offers a valuable way forward to provide fairness in our system. When an accused person has faced due process and been found not guilty, and when the judge delivers the view that the prosecution was ill conceived, it should be in the judge’s power to suggest that the accused’s contributions should be reimbursed. I hope that members across the chamber will support the amendment. I move amendment 23.

The cabinet secretary mentioned differentiation in the way that justice is applied in Scotland. Throughout history, there has always been differentiation in the application of justice. In this chamber, we try to improve sections of our justice system and to develop it in a progressive and sometimes radical fashion, as I said earlier. The argument that we have heard is that we will end up giving back money to people who, for some reason or other, might not justifiably receive cash at the end of their prosecution. Amendment 23 in my name indicates that that would be a matter for the discretion of the judge, who would have heard all the circumstances, would know the background and would, I suggest, decide that funds should be reimbursed in only extremely unusual circumstances. Members should bear in mind that those who would be reimbursed would on many occasions be those who are in most need of the finance in their family budgets. I agree that Margaret Mitchell’s amendment 25 opens up a range of challenges and options that we do not fully understand at this time. I hope that members will support amendment 23.

Annabel Goldie makes a strong case for amendments 26 and 27. The Justice Committee’s discussion of implementation of part 2 occasioned a great deal of controversy and there is no doubt that there is uncertainty about the efficacy of the cabinet secretary’s proposals. I agree with Miss Goldie that there seems to be nothing to spook the Government in amendments 26 and 27. I hope that the cabinet secretary will welcome a first-year review and a review every three years thereafter. The changes in legal aid provision have caused a great deal of concern in the legal profession. As the changes come alongside wider changes that might affect courts and other elements of the justice system, it must be proper that we keep a weather eye on them and know, at the earliest opportunity, whether they are working well. I support amendments 26 and 27.

The cabinet secretary mentioned that he is arranging for SLAB to make collections on behalf of solicitors on payment of a fee. Was he able to share with the Law Society the level that he expected that fee to be set at?

I would like to put aside the rights and wrongs of the bill for a moment and look at the approach that we have witnessed in the lead-up to our discussions of the bill. I have no doubt that the names of consultees form large lists on various A4 pages, but it has become apparent that consultees lack confidence that their views—not only on part 1 but on part 2, as we have heard—were listened to and responded to productively. Let us look at the headlines on parts 1 and 2. Who could object to the Scottish civil justice council and the aims that the bill sets out for it? It is long overdue and progressive, and one hopes that it will place civil justice to the fore and modernise a system that I have no doubt needs fresh air. Equally, who could object to the principle in part 2 that those who can pay should pay? It is logical and represents a desirable outcome that I have no doubt that many members of the public support. Given that, why have we had industrial action in our courts, a split among solicitors, an angry response from many solicitors who tried to have their views heard, and a demonstration outside this building by solicitors before we met to discuss the bill? The rejection at stages 2 and 3 of all Opposition amendments that were lodged to parts 1 and 2 was unedifying. The improvements that Opposition parties suggested were meant to be constructive and to make the legislation that comes to pass more acceptable to the public and something that could be lauded by all. As a result of the threats of industrial action and the legal profession’s well-publicised resistance to the proposed changes, we have ended up with policy on the hoof in part 2. Changes have been implemented at the last minute. The cabinet secretary said this afternoon that he did not know what the cost of some services might be in the future. We have ended up with a transfer from the Government to solicitors of the risk of non-recovery of some fees. Solicitors might well also have to pay the Scottish Legal Aid Board for its efforts to recover outstanding fees. I mentioned earlier the injustice for those who are acquitted in cases where judges indicate that the prosecutions have been ill conceived. Measures in this regard were rejected because of the problems that they might present—Christine Grahame said that they would open a can of worms. I say to the cabinet secretary that, sometimes, cans of worms need to be opened. The problems cannot be resolved at one swoop—if they could, they would have been dealt with a long time ago—but there is no doubt that some cases that go through our courts leave people damaged and in poverty. If there are elements that we can introduce to make things better for the public, we are duty bound to introduce them. There is no attempt in the bill to deal with people who would appear to come before the courts on regular occasions throughout the year, accessing legal aid for three, four, five or six separate cases. Nothing has been done to deal with that. With regret, I must indicate that I do not support the enactment of the bill, and I will be voting against it.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I hope that I will not need four minutes. First, I thank Dave Thompson and his committee for their valuable work reviewing the cross-party group arrangements for the Parliament. As someone who was recently elected to the Parliament, the work and the commitment of cross-party groups are new to me. As convener of the CPG on China, I have come to learn the value of CPGs to the Parliament, to the general public and to those with very specific interests—in my case, interest in China in the round. The report is right to indicate that we need to take care that CPGs do not become another means for lobbyists to influence the work of the Parliament and to try to gain unfair access to those who have the right to make decisions within this chamber and elsewhere. The report sets out a healthy approach to the relationships that should exist across the Parliamentary groups and their work within the cross-party arrangements. The request for annual returns from all CPGs is common sense. If the CPGs are to work effectively, one would expect that there would be an annual report from them, setting out what has been achieved and what the vision is for their future work. The ability for the Parliament to request specific information about the support that groups receive from the private sector is an important power to offer and the introduction of draft minutes opens up that whole environment to further comments.

The one observation that I offer from experience is that the complete absence of an ability to fund some measure of small hospitality can be, to some extent, debilitating. Not having the opportunity to give people who come to the Parliament of their own accord in the evenings a cup of tea or coffee and perhaps a biscuit—or some form of refreshment short of luxurious—is debilitating and makes us look, on occasion, a bit cheap-minded. It is a question of courtesy—if we are hosts in this building, we should be able to offer at least some level of hospitality. I understand the economics of such things and I also understand that, on occasion, that opportunity could be abused. I would like to think, however, that with the proper supervision we could at least begin to offer a measure of hospitality to those who come to the Parliament and, at the same time, conduct our business. On the whole, as I indicated earlier, the work that Dave Thompson and his committee have done is entirely valuable to the Parliament and keeps us on the right side of integrity as we conduct our business in the chamber and in the environment of the cross-party groups.

I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for acknowledging the parliamentary motion that I lodged. The chair of the SPA indicated in a Justice Committee meeting that, in his view, the democratic oversight of the police service would be provided by his authority and, indeed, his post. I know that, last year, the cabinet secretary evinced support for the need for democratic oversight by the Parliament, and I am pleased that he welcomed the fact that the Justice Committee will discuss that matter tomorrow. Will he confirm that he still welcomes a committee of the Parliament, in whatever form, providing democratic oversight of what is obviously a very contentious issue?

Thank you, Presiding Officer, for allowing me to contribute to the debate. I commend Malcolm Chisholm for bringing these matters to the chamber and support his call to address the continuing abuse of women, whether by the use of new technology and other new means, or by the sex trade or whatever. I also thank Sarah Boyack for acknowledging the work that has been done in the decades since the setting up of Zero Tolerance, particularly by the police service in Scotland. Despite that work, more than 1,000 women are victims of domestic abuse. As we debate the issue, somewhere in Scotland a woman is probably being abused in her home—the place where she should feel safe and should feel that she can be as she should be. My commitment on such matters dates back nearly 40 years. My first attendance at a murder inquiry as a detective officer involved going to a dwelling house on the north side of Glasgow. I believed that I would be involved in an interesting investigation to discover who some miscreant was, only to find myself—the week before Christmas—in a tenement building in which a woman had been kicked to death all round the house. Not a single room in the house did not contain her blood, her hair and other tissue. As far as her partner was concerned, her crime was that she had taken the benefit cheque and spent it on food and Christmas presents for the children. Her partner, who had been out at the bookie’s during the day and had imbibed at tea time, had come home and felt aggrieved about the fact that the woman in his life had taken the decision to spend his cash in that manner. The abuse of women has nothing to do with sex. Abuse in its real sense is entirely about power, control and gratification. That murder has never left me. Over the succeeding months and years, I attended many places in the aftermath of sexual abuse, rape and murder, when women were abused by the people they should have trusted most—the men in their lives—but who let them down repeatedly. Hence my commitment to Zero Tolerance and to changing attitudes in Scottish society: I want to ensure that such things no longer occur. There have been many successes and there is no doubt that Zero Tolerance has played a major part in the changes that have taken place, but relationships between men and women need to change. Women need to find a way of playing their full part in our society and receiving due respect for what they are—human beings. We need to take forward the zero tolerance campaign. It cannot be put on the shelf as work that has been completed. We can feel good about what we have done in the past but there is much more to be done in the future. There are new trends and strains in terms of abuse. We have young people who are using mobile phones and the internet to debase and undermine girls and women. I hope that the minister will bear in mind those new developments and take advice on how we might deal with such matters. This chamber should not take its eye off the ball: domestic abuse is still a major problem in Scotland. There were 59,847 cases in the past year. Children are being abused in such circumstances and children are learning to abuse in the future. We need to put an end to that.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what action is being taken to replace substandard road markings on the A75 and A76 trunk roads. (S4O-01614)

The minister may be aware of specific concerns raised in the Road Safety Markings Association study about the condition of the road markings on those roads and other roads in the area. I am sure that his commitment to road safety is well recorded and hope that he will further press the organisation to ensure that those markings are brought up to date as soon as possible.

As the cabinet secretary may know, the number of community service orders for 2010-11 stood at 5,940, of which some 1,932—more than a third—were breached. The number of community service orders also stands at the same level as for 2006-07. What steps will the cabinet secretary take to ensure that such orders are properly enforced and are not seen, in the public’s eye, as a soft option?

I applaud Patricia Ferguson for bringing Bobath Scotland to the Parliament’s attention and I thank Kenneth Gibson for speaking in support of her motion. Bobath Scotland has existed for 18 years. As we have heard, approximately one in 500 children born in Scotland is affected by cerebral palsy. Bobath Scotland supports 135 such children across the country. I have no doubt that it benefits from the fact that its cousin organisation in England has existed for somewhat longer—50 years—and treats 300 children a year, as well as the families connected with those young people. I outline the existence of both organisations because, as I hope the minister is already aware, Bobath Scotland’s existence creates a body of knowledge about the challenges that relate to cerebral palsy and about the problems that are faced not only by the young people concerned but by families and friends who are trying to help. That body of knowledge informs the national debate about what is required for the future and about the changes that can be made to affect young people’s quality of life and quality of experience. Patricia Ferguson outlined the difference that therapy had made to one young person’s life. One hopes that every young person in Scotland who needs access to the support and treatment that are available through Bobath Scotland can benefit from that. I have no doubt that the minister will outline that the national health service across Scotland has many Bobath-trained practitioners, but I think that he and other members would accept that the centre of excellence develops the way forward for the future and informs the best treatments. I also have no doubt that the excellent facility at Port Dundas in Glasgow—I know it reasonably well and I know the quality of the environment that is provided there—enables the education of people who are new to the experience of cerebral palsy and who are trying to come to terms with what it will mean and the impact that it will have. The facility creates a training environment for people who want to develop and to support families who are experiencing cerebral palsy in their midst. It also provides a support mechanism—a means of mentoring and counselling family and friends who are trying their best to ensure that young people can make the most of their lives and develop appropriately. The centre of excellence in Glasgow is an important resource for Scotland. I would like to think that all families in Scotland can access it and that it can be used as a resource for all of Scotland. As a member for South Scotland, I know the difficulties for families who try to travel to Glasgow to access treatment. Nevertheless, given the quality of the treatment that is provided there, it is important that that avenue should be made available to them. The main part of Patricia Ferguson’s speech was about the funding element. Currently, Bobath relies heavily on charity. Many people would think that it is appropriate that, where a cause reaches out to the public in Scotland, the public will want to support it. It is right that we pay due regard to the Robertson Trust’s support, and I hope that the minister will bear in mind the need for funding and that he will support Bobath Scotland where he can to the best of his ability.

The cabinet secretary will remember that I first went to see him in December last year; John Finnie invited me to do so and Christine Grahame encouraged me. I wanted to speak to him about two pressing issues. The first was the governance arrangements for the SPS and an absolute need for clarity on operational independence. The second was the absence of democratic oversight on the part of the Parliament at a key time of police reform. This morning, the Association of Scottish Police Superintendents contacted me to reinforce its concern about operational independence. The incoming chief constable is already on record on that matter and there is a difference of view with his chair. Her Majesty’s inspector of constabulary has also commented. In July 2012, the police reform team prepared a blueprint, agreed with civil servants, that showed the directors of finance and HR alongside the heads of public information and corporate services, reporting via the chief constable to the board. They were all answerable to the chief constable. In the absence of any statement from the cabinet secretary, it soon became evident that the incoming chair of the SPA had different views. At his first appearance before the Justice Committee on 23 October, Mr Emery was less than candid about his approach to questions of governance and structure, yet days later at his induction meeting for the SPA on 29 October he was able to say: “We have a very wide ranging set of responsibilities in the running of policing ... I am a businessman and I see policing through that lens ... I equate the Chief Constable to a Chief Operations Officer ... The vision does not have a final form. It is the SPA that will develop that clarity”. As a result of various approaches from ASPS, which included support from the Scottish Police Federation, and approaches from across the police service, I lodged a motion on 5 November entitled “Concerns about Threat to Operational Independence of Single Police Force”. Questions asked of both the cabinet secretary and the First Minister produced a lack of clarity on future operational independence. Much has been made of a creative friction, almost in a light-hearted way, but policing provides the bedrock upon which many communities build. Arrangements for the tone, direction and—yes—vision for policing have an impact on that bedrock.

Margo MacDonald makes a good point, which I will come to at the end of my speech. On 27 November, the Justice Committee brought back the chief constable and the SPA chair, along with HMICS, to resolve possible conflicts. The way forward was further confused at that meeting. The chief constable said that if the debate about primacy and operational independence continues for “a lot longer, it might start to become negative”. He added later: “I believe that it is essential that I have day-to-day control of the HR and finance functions”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 27 November 2012; c 2111, 2126.] That day, we learned far more about what was happening from the words that were not uttered than from the few that were. Reporting lines to the authority should be through the chief constable. The questions for the cabinet secretary are whether he agrees with Christie Smith’s letter, whether he equates the chief constable with an operational manager and whether the convener or the chief constable is responsible for policing.

Will the member give way?

Will the cabinet secretary be good enough to acknowledge that the pressure from the Justice Committee in examining the matters might have encouraged those two people to deal with some of their differences?

Much has been said in the debate about the impact of those in the media on victims and witnesses who have become their target, and I associate myself with all that has been said in that regard. However, let us not forget that the Lord Leveson inquiry reflects a low point in public life, even by modern standards. Lord Leveson’s examination of the cesspit of corrupt relationships reveals the rich and powerful rubbing shoulders with politicians and various public servants in pursuit of self-interest. I imagine that there would be no surprise in the public’s mind in that regard. The dissection of greed and avarice in the report demonstrates the lemming-like pursuit by professional politicians of all parties in the chase after power, influence and control. Leveson nevertheless provides a snapshot of life that is alien to ordinary members of the public—a snapshot in which some people suspend all normal behaviour to surrender the future to acts of criminality and amorality, all in the complete absence of any notion of integrity. In a previous life, I would have recognised such traits as part of organised crime, and I suggest that many members of the public would today see a form of polite mafia within the media hierarchy. Any suggestion that the matter could be revolved simply by amending a voluntary oversight system fails to realise that significant and powerful members of the media had the audacity not only to break the law, but to corrupt public officials—including police officers—to achieve their aim. Their aims were not limited to headlines alone: it is self-evident that their aims included controlling the very means by which they could dictate business success for themselves, corporately and personally. Attempting to master Government ministers, politicians, public servants and police officers provided senior media figures with the best opportunity to deliver success. The acceptance of cash, gifts and supposed friendships in exchange for information, intelligence and favours—the very stuff entrusted to public figures—left the rest of us unprotected. We became the flotsam and jetsam of infighting between powerful figures. Even families that were struck by the most horrendous circumstances, such as Milly Dowler’s parents, became pawns in the power play to demonstrate insider knowledge, and thereby influence. As others have commented, Scotland was not immune. There is a need to change the law and to introduce new means of oversight. In that light, the First Minister’s intentions to play a significant part in the proposed cross-party discussions on Scotland’s response to Lord Leveson play poorly with me. The First Minister, whatever his motivation, was willing to engage with the Murdoch regime and promote its interests in the takeover of BSkyB despite already knowing the lengths to which the Murdoch group was prepared to go in the Dowler case.

The member makes her point. As I indicated, whatever the First Minister’s motivation, he was still willing to engage with the Murdochs, even knowing the impact of their involvement with the Dowler case.

I am sorry, but I have only a limited time. The First Minister has 20 years of experience in the Westminster bubble and knows the impact of journalistic endeavours in that context. In addition, on more than one occasion, he alleged that his bank account had been hacked by a journalist, although he has thus far failed to explain why he has not complained about that gross invasion of his privacy and the criminal act that it reflects. On public duty, ordinary members of our society are expected to report crime, and I expect Mr Salmond to do likewise. In all other spheres of life, those circumstances would encourage an executive to step aside and ensure that a fresh eye reviewed the way forward with the intention of providing the Parliament with a balanced set of proposals. I hope that Mr Salmond will reconsider his situation. It is a necessary and obvious step that there should be cross-party talks. They should purposely examine the need or otherwise for a separate Scottish model of governance for calling the media to account. The idea that Scotland must have an individual solution does not hold water. In many areas, oversight can benefit from the UK response. We need legislation and effective governance in the matter. However, we also require the press to be really free. To be effective in this global environment, the way forward needs to be swiftly identified. We should maintain an open mind on what the solution should be.

Does the member accept that, in terms of transparency and the perceptions of the general public, there would be some virtue in the First Minister having the courage to stand aside and leave it to others?

First, I welcome all that the minister said in his opening speech, and I wish him every success in delivering what he can in the remaining negotiations. Secondly, I thank Dennis Robertson for setting the scene for the focus of my contribution, which seeks to remind us that we should place people at the heart of the debate, and that we are talking about people, their families and their futures. As a society, including Governments of all hues, we talk for a long time and often wearily about fairness and equality in delivering access to employment. My experience of the issue—which is why I am speaking today—dates back to 2001, when I was in charge of policing in Airdrie and we introduced a closed-circuit television system for the first time. We were short of money, and we needed help from quality people to monitor our system. I discovered that Remploy factories and employment services were available and willing to help. Mary Scanlon will be happy to know that the cost, support and sourcing of staff made the business of delivering far more effective and efficient. The factory was able to shortlist staff for sifting and interviews, and an interview panel was organised at Airdrie police office. More than a dozen candidates of all different cuts and sizes came forward. Various mobility issues were raised with regard to wheelchair access and upper limb problems, and a plethora of health and safety issues were raised by those who count the beans. Nonetheless, the major issue that I discovered, as someone who was used to managing staff, was a lack of confidence, a debilitating shyness and an inability to communicate properly. I found that, once we selected our five candidates and they came on duty, their timekeeping was perfect and their self-management was first class. However, they spent almost their entire shift speaking to no one—they did not say a word. They monitored the cameras throughout their entire shift in a most effective and efficient manner, and they supported the people who were out there doing work on the street. That led to an interaction between the police, the support staff and those who came from Remploy. Initially, there was a reluctance to engage and a fear of the unknown, with new staff coming into the office, and I think that there was a division between the two groups of staff. However, the staff who had been there long term—the police officers—quickly came to rely on the Remploy staff, who ensured their security on the streets, gave them support on the streets when they felt threatened, and provided evidence that allowed convictions to be achieved.

There is no doubt that that is the case. Rather than the new recruits bringing problems to the offices, they brought understanding, compassion and, more important, a work ethic that was valued. What did Remploy do in this whole circumstance? It prepared the people for entry into normal work. It gave them the opportunity to have the courage to have a go and developed a desire in them to contribute. As Dennis Robertson said in his eloquent speech, the Remploy people wanted to work, be part of an effective society and deliver as best they could. They wanted to be employed. As for the results, although I had my doubts that they would survive in our macho environment, they became an essential part of each shift. When I tried to move monitors from one shift to another, there was an outcry because the police staff rely on people they trust and they knew that the monitors were first class. They became valued members of the shift and became outgoing. They even spoke their minds after a few months, and they were invited to all the social functions that the shifts engaged in. The practical results in Airdrie were that crime dropped by 21 per cent in the first two years, there was a 48 per cent fall in crimes of dishonesty, and detections were 16 per cent up. For the operators, that was a tremendous impact. They felt valued and had a sense of satisfaction with their work. They were genuine contributors to what we did in the office and each of them brought the strength of their knowledge and the strength of their disability into play in the police station. Without the Remploy element, I do not know whether those people would have made the transition to normal work. All these years later I still bump into them in various places in the central belt. Indeed, one of them has gone on to become a senior manager of a local authority unit. Disabled people deserve the opportunity to participate. There are many opportunities where they could lead the way in terms of employment. There was a disclosure in the Daily Record yesterday of a secret deal selling out Remploy workers, which is shameful act that needs to be reviewed.

We need to know who is responsible for such matters. We value people who work for us within Remploy, and I trust that the minister will look further and will examine options and find new solutions to deliver opportunities for Remploy workers across Scotland.

In the light of his response, will the First Minister acknowledge that the Parliament’s intention in legislating was to deliver full operational independence to the incoming chief constable and that moves to limit that independence would be unwelcome and unwarranted?

What is the Scottish Government’s position on the compensation that was received by William Beggs as a result of delays to his appeals?

I thank the First Minister—

I thank the First Minister for that response. Does he agree that the public in general—certainly, communities throughout Ayrshire—find such awards to be extremely distasteful? Will he reassure Parliament that his Government will take steps to minimise the opportunities of which prisoners can take advantage to receive financial benefit from such events?

What is the Scottish Government’s position on the compensation that was received by William Beggs as a result of delays to his appeals.

I thank the First Minister—

I thank the First Minister for that response. Does he agree that the public in general—certainly, communities throughout Ayrshire—find such awards to be extremely distasteful? Will he reassure Parliament that his Government will take steps to minimise the opportunities of which prisoners can take advantage to receive financial benefit from such events?

For the sake of fairness and a comprehensive review, the minister said that before 2008 there was no drugs strategy. However, at the millennium, the Parliament committed to action through “Tackling Drugs in Scotland: Action in Partnership”. “The Road to Recovery: A New Approach to Tackling Scotland’s Drug Problem,” which was published in 2008, certainly put some steel into what could be described as a strategy for the future. That document established a shift in policy from working simply to reduce harm to instead focusing on helping people to become drug free. The strategy identified some key outcomes, which have been referred to, including the establishment of a national evidence group and the work with the NHS Information Statistics Division to deliver enhanced misuse databases. There is no doubt that there was a need for that information. “Reducing harm and promoting recovery: a report on methadone treatment for substance misuse in Scotland” was produced in 2007. The report suggested, among other things, the setting up of a national methadone audit process to ascertain the number of people on methadone and their state of recovery, support for pilots of good practice, and the setting up of a strategic process to facilitate and co-ordinate quality research. In a previous life, I contributed to those consultation processes. I welcomed the change in focus—I supported that change and support it to this day. However, for me, the key point of the debate is to review what improvements have occurred in the intervening years and whether they take us in the right direction. In September 2010, “Research For Recovery: A Review of the Drugs Evidence Base” suggested the introduction of a drugs research forum, saying: “What we are lacking in Scotland … is a clear evidence base about the long-term pathways to recovery and their impact on families and communities.” On 5 September 2012, the minister gave an interview to the press, in which she indicated her belief that there is a huge problem and that there are no figures to show whether our responses are work. I agree with that assessment. She also said that “The whole point about the Road To Recovery is digging down and getting the kind of statistics you are talking about”. Although I agree that we need those statistics, the strategy is about reducing addiction and rehabilitation. She also said: “it can’t be done overnight and it is against a backdrop of there having been nothing for over 20 years.” I presume that that refers to the statistics that were available. There is no doubt that they were—and still are, to some extent—vague in the extreme. What about the policy of reducing harm and helping people to become drug free? What has happened on that? The minister asked how we know whether recovery is happening. During the past five years, 2,643 people have died as a result of drugs overdoses, with a record number dying in the past year alone, unfortunately. Each year, £8 billion is spent on methadone, and a further £28 million was spent delivering it in 2011. That represents a rise of 36 per cent from the 2007 figure and a 9 per cent increase in the number of prescriptions. Each year, 22,000 people are prescribed methadone as an alternative to heroin. United Nations statistics still show that Scotland is at the high end of usage—a shame to our country. Almost 25 per cent of the population is prescribed methadone daily. More grandparents are becoming parents again, as they look after their children and their children’s children.

I am afraid that I am short of time. There is something to be done. There is a challenge to be addressed.

I will.

The statistics that I received from Barlinnie prison—

Allow me to finish. Those statistics seem to reflect the experience in other prisons, too. They talk about somewhere in excess of 22 per cent of prisoners accessing methadone. I have no doubt that those who provide services and care, including the doctors and chemists, are deeply committed to improving the situation, but they need leadership from the Government, direction from the strategic plan and strength to be given to its implementation. After five years, the Government continues to suggest that it has insufficient statistics and that it is up against a problem in trying to work out how to invest in measures that work. It seems content to allow our prison population to queue daily for access to drug treatment and it is satisfied that 80 per cent of them will leave prison on exactly the same dosage of methadone as they were on when they entered. If properly directed, the strategy as envisioned would help to support those who want to be rehabilitated. My comments do not undermine it, but call on the Government to get real about the drugs problem and to shift the scarce resources to solutions that are shown to work effectively.

I welcome the creation and inception of national adoption week, an important week in the calendar for Scotland. At one time, an education department in the central belt of Scotland had a tight line that said, “Every child is special.” The speeches that we have heard today reflect the true understanding of the fact that every child deserves to be treated as special and is entitled to receive love and support, to feel secure in their environment and to know that there are adults around who will support and help them to be all that they can be in this life. If there were no other reasons to justify the Government placing a priority on adoption and fostering, that fact would be sufficient in itself. For those who need additional, worldly reasons, however, I point out that just under two years ago Audit Scotland reported that £250 million is spent annually on local authority residential care for our children. It acknowledged that the service that is received is not always of the best quality and that it is difficult to demonstrate that value is achieved from that spend. It was a shock to realise that the yearly cost to the public purse per child is £150,000. Although there are no statistics for Scotland—as others have said, we need to remedy that—statistics for elsewhere in the UK suggest that children who come from a care background are 13 times more likely to end up in our prison population and that 27 per cent of prisoners who are currently in custody in England come from a care background, as do half of all prisoners who are under 25. Those statistics are shocking in themselves and there is no doubt that children should not have to go through the experience of care and end up with that result. It is a failure on our behalf; it is a failure on society’s behalf. The efforts of the Government and those engaged with national adoption week are therefore to be applauded. Much has been said about the considerable bureaucracy that delays children being taken into care and on to some kind of permanent arrangement. There is no doubt that those bureaucratic processes need to be revisited. The example that Richard Lyle gave of waiting six years to offer a stable home environment to a person who requires that support is in itself shocking and needs to be dealt with. I cannot let today go by without acknowledging the McKenzie family, a South Lanarkshire family who offered themselves as foster parents. They desired a baby or toddler, but eventually a troubled teenager was given into their care. Unfortunately, that teenager eventually assaulted the mother of the house, who died as a result. I highlight that case not to cause any caution among those in the chamber in taking this issue forward, but for two reasons. First, it is important that we take due consideration of the kinds of threats and challenges that we face in dealing with troubled children. Secondly, delaying the removal of a child from a difficult background results in a troubled young adolescent who someone somewhere has to manage. A delay of 10 years, as mentioned previously, only contributes to those difficulties. Much has already been said about the more than 16,000 children currently in our care. Some 2 per cent of those are under a year old, 19 per cent are under four years old, 37 per cent are between five and 11 years old, and 42 per cent are over 12 years of age. Yet, although we have more than 16,000 children, adoption is still maintained at a relatively low number. Those children cry out for a stable background, support and some kind of direction in their lives. The points that Nanette Milne made and Nigel Don reinforced described the kind of life raft that those children require—and require urgently. It is beholden on us to find a way through the morass that keeps those in need from the circumstances that can support them. National adoption week is important, because it focuses on and raises awareness of the needs of children and the requirement for more adults in our society to come forward. I encourage the minister to achieve robust data to oversee the decision-making process, not only to move children on quickly but to ensure that the adults who come forward and offer their services have the right risk assessment done for the kind of relationship that they are entering into and get the support that they need to deal with children who have come from challenging, difficult and sometimes damaged backgrounds.

I support the Government’s motion and Neil Bibby’s amendment, and I look forward to hearing more contributions from others in the chamber.

First, I congratulate Hugh Henry who has worked tirelessly, with the support of USDAW, to bring the matter to the attention of Parliament and to public notice. On behalf of Labour members, let me say to Mary Scanlon that, after her contribution today, I am sure that her future support for the campaign will be most welcome. I have learned through experience that shopworkers do not expect a great deal from their workplace. They expect that it should have a reasonable level of cleanliness, that the environment should be safe and that it should have been designed to be secure so that they can work without undue pressure. Employers should be expected to deliver appropriate staff training to prepare staff to deal with the challenges that they may face. Working practices and arrangements should be designed to protect staff when they are going about their lawful duties. The design of the workspace should provide a secure environment for workers to do their work and to do it without threat. In those circumstances, we should acknowledge and bear it in mind that many shop staff work part-time, are largely low paid and generally work very long hours and at antisocial times of the day, of the week, of the month and throughout the year during holidays. They do all that for the convenience of us, the general public. The debate is timely, as it comes in the lead-up to the Christmas rush, when many staff face particular pressures. In all those circumstances, shopworkers and other public servants do not deserve only the support of the general public, who need their service; they also deserve and need support and intervention from the police, prosecutors, the courts and Parliament. We should deliver the necessary health and safety legislation, background and support, as well as the enforcement of current laws. If necessary, we should provide new powers if we find that the current arrangements are not working. The Government has a duty to ascertain why there has been an 83 per cent rise in verbal attacks and physical assaults on shopworkers. More important, the Government must explain how that rise is possible, given that it goes against the wider crime trends, which are going in a different direction. Assaults and verbal attacks have a debilitating effect on staff. Staff feel vulnerable because they are often on their own in shops and other locations in our communities. Staff are easily identified by those who would attack them verbally or offer violence, and they often live in the same communities and feel the pressure of thuggish behaviour and threats day and daily. Such threats should not be faced by anybody in employment, never mind by people who are on the minimum wage, and certainly not by young people or those who have served the public for decades in the best interests of the communities that visit shops and premises. Many shopworkers are young and at the start of their working lives. We should provide them with the confidence to go forward and do better in their future, and to build careers for themselves. The many others who have worked for decades also deserve the support of the general public and Parliament. I hope that the Government will bear in mind the statistics that Hugh Henry has brought to our attention and decide whether they show the beginning of a trend or just a spike. In any case, the issue needs to be dealt with. Workers should have confidence that they can go to their work, do their shift and go home again without experiencing violence or threats. The trade unions’ freedom from fear campaign is an important way forward. It deserves a proper response from Parliament and, importantly, from the Government. I support Hugh Henry in his work to bring the issue to our attention.

The development of a Scottish civil justice council comes at the end of a long process of consultations, reviews and reports. Not only will the creation of the council implement the reforms identified by Lord Gill but, as the Lord President acknowledges, properly constituted and directed, the council should deliver on-going modernisation, deal with matters affecting the administration of justice in our civil courts and create the necessary rules. As the cabinet secretary said in his opening speech, the council should be an agent for change. The Parliament hopes that it will take that responsibility seriously. With a limit of no more than 20, the council’s membership reflects a significant presence of legal professionals: judges, solicitors and advocates. There are to be at least two representatives from the consumer protection community and, in evidence to the committee, the Lord President provided significant assurances that he will seek an appropriate balance on the council to ensure that all those who access civil justice across Scotland have their views considered and properly weighed. As other speakers have said, the Lord President has access to six personal nominations. We hope that he will use those wisely. The Lord President carries a heavy burden in that regard, although I feel confident that the current Lord President is a match for that duty and, with Government support, will be able to deliver on what is a radical change for Scotland’s justice system. The precedents created now set the tone for future changes for civil justice in Scotland. We are advised that the additional costs involved in the creation of the civil justice council are to be borne by the Scottish Court Service and paid for from fees that are paid into the system in relation to access to civil justice. That outcome is to be welcomed in these days of economic stress. Part 2 of the bill revisits the provision of legal aid in the context of criminal justice. Under current provisions, persons subject to the criminal process who get assistance by way of representation can, in appropriate circumstances, expect to contribute between £7 and £142 towards the cost of their legal representation. The bill proposes that such a citizen who has a disposable income in excess of £68 a week may be asked to contribute between £5 and £1,518 towards the cost of their legal representation. Such rules apply not only to indigenous Scots but to any person in Scotland from the European Union and, I imagine, from elsewhere in the world. Although I welcome an approach that ensures that those who can pay do pay, I want to ensure that, in circumstances in which an accused person attracts prosecution, we will be able to apply rules in deciding ability to pay—rules that are efficient in their application and catch those who seek to hide their true wealth. At the same time, the rules need to protect those who are genuinely unable to finance proper legal representation.

I am obliged to the member for that point. Indeed, in evidence to the Justice Committee, many solicitors acknowledged that they had found that their ability to obtain fees in circumstances that they outlined had been severely stunted. The chaotic approach of some clients left solicitors in a position of investing in future service provision, taking the loss on the chin as a result. In terms of the future provision of services, the proposal in the bill seems a precarious way forward. The provision of public defenders to fill the gap in circumstances in which solicitors feel unable to represent clients is a proposal that seems—on the basis of the available evidence—to be poorly thought out and lacking in true substance. I hope that that element will be further considered and fleshed out. The Scottish Government must revisit those elements to assess the options that are available to it before taking matters further. The reluctance of SLAB to play a part in this part of the recovery of fees speaks volumes. The knock-on effect arising from a client’s failure to pay the element of the fee due to their solicitor—perhaps leading on occasion to the withdrawal of services before or during a trial—was discussed in evidence that was given to the Justice Committee, and we heard that that could cause significant disruption with regard to the way in which trials are administered. The cabinet secretary would do well to consider that issue, which deserves further consideration. I have sympathy with the view that judges should have the power to order the reimbursement of costs to an accused who is subsequently acquitted and discharged, in very specific circumstances. The broad thrust of the bill’s intentions in part 1 and part 2 is to be welcomed. However, as always, the devil is in the detail.

The digital era offers a severe challenge to the courts with regard to how they administer justice in the modern environment. There is no doubt in my mind that there is a need to modernise the culture and administration of our courts, which are couched—as many see them—in arcane convention and processes that are often difficult to understand. Sandra White was correct to identify that we need to take great care before we move forward on any reforms on access to courts by the media. We should remember why the courts are there in the first place: to seek and deliver justice, and to pay appropriate attention to fairness. They are not an entertainment, nor are they a source of information in a broad sense. However, it is an agreed convention throughout Europe—not solely in Scotland—that in order to administer justice it should be seen to be done. Evidence is often tested and the credibility of witnesses and witness statements is subject to examination and cross-examination. In those circumstances, one of the overriding effects of attendance at court is fear. That fear affects witnesses, who have been drawn into a situation that is often not of their making, but who seek to deliver their civic duties; victims, who have unfortunately been on the receiving end of some criminal activity; and the accused, who are there before the courts so that the courts can decide on their guilt or otherwise in respect of the charges. In my experience, jurors too are not particularly keen to volunteer to provide their duties. Equally, officers of the court, along with the other actors in the trial process, expect that they will be seen and be subject to public scrutiny in the court and that, given that there is physical access to the court, people will be listening to the process. However, they do not expect to be the subject of a public broadcast in which their identities—and the identities of all those people—are transmitted to some unknown and unseen viewer. Such changes create additional pressures with regard to the consideration of safety and the attraction that the courts hold in bringing people to offer evidence. I suggest that the development of closed-circuit television in recent years has been based to some extent on the fact that it is difficult to encourage witnesses to come forward and offer evidence. The provision of CCTV images has filled the vacuum that has developed in the past decades. The use of TV in the court will have an impact on witnesses, who know that it may well transmit their identities to the areas that they have come from to give their evidence. Those witnesses who are unfortunate enough to come from areas that are notorious for criminality may well fear all passing adults for weeks and months after their appearance in court. Such pressure is too much for ordinary people to bear. The same attaches to those who serve the court as officials and those who are there as jurors, as well as to the accused. Equally, TV’s appetite for rerunning court proceedings might influence jurors who are engaged in the process of a trial, or jurors coming to live cases in the future. In 2010, a trial involving a former member of the Scottish Parliament created such a press feeding frenzy that the subject was rarely off our televisions. From that experience, I did not detect any improvement in the way in which justice was delivered in the Scottish context. How justice is delivered in such circumstances is now to be the subject of a review by Lord Gill, and I welcome that. It is right that those who have the greatest experience of the processes should have the opportunity to assess the likely impacts. The transmission of judges’ decisions goes a long way towards allowing the general public to understand what is done in their name in our Scottish courts, and I think that most judges would be happy to accept the responsibility of being the subject of such transmissions.

I am sure that such an intervention, once televised, would create a great deal of conflict and difficulty for courts in deciding such a challenge. I encourage the Government to spend a great deal of time looking at how TV could be used for pleading diets and procedural matters in the courts, so that the number of journeys that are made to court by prisoners who are in custody can be reduced. I also ask it to take great care before it decides to change the way in which media is used in our court processes.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in this afternoon’s debate. As an acknowledged city boy—if I may abuse the English language by applying the word “boy” to myself—I have come in my adult life to admire the farming community and, through my growing knowledge of it, regard it as a mainstay in Scotland’s economic future. The fact that six members of this chamber who represent either the South Scotland region or constituencies in the south of Scotland have taken part in this debate reflects the importance that we believe the farming industry has to that area, although it is also important to other parts of our nation. I welcome Paul Wheelhouse to his new role and wish him well in carrying out his responsibilities. I acknowledge the style and commitment that Stewart Stevenson previously brought to those tasks. Common agricultural policy reform is nothing if not complex. Even when we agree on the broad and general concepts, as we seem to have done this afternoon, the detail of the proposals can fracture any consensus. The Parliament must focus on the needs of Scottish farmers and, above all, the requirements of Scottish consumers. However, we cannot consider the issues in a vacuum. As with many other budgets, CAP budgets will face a considerable squeeze, so it is important that the reforms genuinely simplify processes and allow greater transparency, rather than merely appear to do so. Similarly, we need a reformed system that not only gives Scottish and other farmers the support that they need but evens out the inequalities that have existed within and between member states for many years. I am sure that all members appreciate farmers’ consistent commitment and the hard work that they do on behalf of Scotland. The efforts of Scottish farmers in all weathers play a major role in supporting the rural economy and preserving Scottish land. Farmers also do much to contribute to the considerable reputation of Scottish produce, which is rightly a famous and trusted brand throughout the world because of its high quality. However, farmers’ needs must be balanced against the need to take action to combat the significant challenges that lie ahead, such as those of food security, rising energy prices, climate change and—the challenge of all pressing challenges—the economy. Some of the proposals to deal with those issues involve greening pillar 1. There seems to be broad support for such measures, but it is essential that the proposals involve enough flexibility to respond to specific local needs in Scotland. The three main greening proposals are on maintaining permanent pasture, crop diversification and maintaining ecological focus areas. The proposals might work in significant parts of the EU’s 27 member states but, in application, they are too prescriptive and inflexible to work successfully throughout Scotland. That said, given that agriculture is so different in the various climates and terrains of the European Union, there is hope that we will not be the only ones who are concerned about the overly prescriptive detail in the proposals. As many members have said, it is important that the UK Government represents the whole of the UK in the negotiations to achieve a fairer distribution of pillar 2 funding. In turn, we must do what we can to push the UK Government to secure for Scottish farmers a fairer and more proportionate share of the funding that is available to the UK, to help address the lower per-hectare share that Scotland has received in previous periods. The negotiations are important and will contribute to the shape of farming in Scotland until 2020 and beyond. Given the importance and prolonged nature of the CAP reform negotiations, it is unfortunate that the Prime Minister’s recent reshuffle changed significant positions at DEFRA. By all accounts, the Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs and the Environment and the previous Minister of State at DEFRA, Jim Paice, worked well together, so it is unfortunate that new relationships will now have to be built while negotiations are progressing. The cabinet secretary therefore has a heavy responsibility to build co-operative working with his new opposite number at UK level to achieve a successful outcome for the farming community in Scotland. I hope that future policy at both the Scottish and UK levels will secure our farmers’ return to the past situation in which Britain was capable of feeding itself. That will be important in a world that is likely to be subject to continuing uncertainty about food. Our farmers must be encouraged to produce in a sustainable way good-quality food at a price that the public can afford. I support Claire Baker’s amendment to the motion.

The Carloway report marks an important milestone for the administration of Scottish justice, as it contains many and complex recommendations and it offers the opportunity to redesign, refresh and update Scottish criminal procedures and to provide the citizen with appropriate protection in the face of state intervention. I welcome the report. Such opportunities come barely once in a lifetime and must not be squandered. Some resist change and insist that our system for the administration of justice is among the best in the world. I feel sure that the reality is somewhat different. That reality demands that we learn lessons from experience and improve where we can. Others have commented on many aspects of Carloway. I will focus on the element of the report that has attracted much attention, which is corroboration and its value as a required standard of proof in criminal cases. For hundreds of years, the principle of corroboration has stood the test of time—a necessary check for the courts in weighing the level of evidential material necessary to prove guilt, not solely in terms of avoiding miscarriages of justice but as a means of protecting an accused from a callous or criminal attempt on the part of prosecutors to use a single witness or piece of evidence to convict a citizen. Corroboration was, and is still seen by many as, an essential safeguard. Initially, I shared that view. My experience in my previous working life indicated that, although it was operationally inconvenient, the need for corroborative evidence ensured that prosecutors pursued an investigation with a view to providing not only a sufficiency of evidence but a level of confidence in the integrity of the evidence provided. However, Lord Carloway provided evidence to the Justice Committee explaining his thinking in detail, and I was impressed with his explanation of the nature of evidence in terms of its quality rather than the quantity provided. I was persuaded by his arguments in principle. Nevertheless, I want to hear in detail what the Government proposes. How does the Government want any new approach to be implemented? Does it propose a blanket abandonment of the need for corroboration on an agreed date, or will the changes be retrospective in their application? Will the Government expect a series of cold case reviews by the Crown Office, or is the intention to set a date on a calendar from which corroboration will no longer be an essential part of the process? There is no doubt that Scotland is out of step with much of the rest of the civilised world in this regard. Nevertheless, the Government should not carelessly cast aside a much-valued safeguard without properly setting out precisely what it intends to replace it with for the future. That is particularly important in a Scotland in which the SNP Government is seeking to cut the legal aid budget over the next three years by up to £20 million in real terms. It also plans to cut court administration costs by £3 million and expects that solicitors will gather from clients an element of the fees that is not currently covered by legal aid provision or that—a novel idea—lawyers will see the loss of a fee as a good decision in the light of possible future business opportunities. There is also the prospect of closure of many of our local courts that hear evidence in criminal cases and the abolition of independent prison visiting committees, not to mention—my personal concern—a lack of any meaningful democratic oversight of the new national police force. Taken together, those steps do not enhance the rights of suspects, nor do they provide a balanced approach to criminal justice. They do provide real reasons why we must have clarity on the Government’s intentions. Many of Carloway’s recommendations make sense in a system that is properly maintained and administered, but added to all those cuts and changes, they will create a real test for justice seen and justice delivered. I hope to be assured that Government ministers understand the challenges and will deliver a justice system that is fit for the 21st century. I hope that they take care to ensure that the justice system that we value today will be regarded in future as a world leader.

I congratulate Sarah Boyack on bringing the debate to the chamber, and I feel sure that the minister will have realised by now that there is a genuine problem to be resolved. It is important that we have confidence in our justice system and believe that those who are responsible for administering and delivering justice on our behalf, by legislation or precedent, do so with a degree of empathy as well as skill. Is that confidence undermined if only those of means can seek employment in the legal profession and, by consequence, the judiciary? Is it important that those who make up the legal profession are there because of their knowledge, skill and talent alone rather than the financial support that they were lucky enough to receive from family? If we believe that it is, it is surely important that there is fair access to the legal profession for people of all backgrounds. Does the present system deliver that fair access? A diploma in professional legal practice is as essential to practising law as the professional graduate diploma in education is to teaching. However, students who are studying for the education diploma can apply for maintenance loans, and their fees are paid by the Scottish Government. The same applies to students who are studying for certain postgraduate diplomas in architecture. Students who are studying for a diploma in professional legal practice, on the other hand, apply for a tuition fee loan of £3,400, which covers approximately half the cost of the fees and materials, depending on the institution that the student attends. There is no longer any support for maintenance for those students, and if any student does not have funds to pay the balance of the fees and materials, they are directed to a bank to apply for a professional and career development loan. If they are successful in obtaining such a loan, it will be lent at commercial rates and must be paid back from one month after graduation, irrespective of the person’s employment situation. The changes been introduced by Government with great haste and—in the Law Society of Scotland’s view—inadequate consultation. The disparity is clear. The Law Society of Scotland is concerned about any move that risks discouraging talented students from progressing with their ambition of becoming a solicitor because they are unable to fund their studies or are reluctant to take on further debt. I share those concerns and the concerns of fellow members in this chamber. At the end of their university studies leading to the diploma year, many students will have as much as £15,000 in student loans. The thought of an additional debt for a student with little means of financial support is worrying for the young person concerned in the current financial climate, but should be of greater concern to this chamber. I hope that the minister reconsiders.

5. To ask the Scottish Government, in light of its not meeting its first climate change target, how it plans to ensure that subsequent targets are achieved.(S4O-01300)

Given the comment about cold weather conditions in 2010 that his predecessor, Stewart Stevenson, made, will the minister put wishes for better weather in the coming winters alongside his warm words and commitment?

I am delighted to speak in the debate and I thank Christine Grahame for securing it. I apologise to the people who have attended Parliament today, because I will not be able to attend the reception after the debate, as I have to chair the cross-party group on China. Such are the challenges of being a member of the Scottish Parliament. The great Polish map of Scotland and its restoration deserve more attention. The project will surely benefit from the debate, as the volunteers seek to bring the attention of local people, as well as people further afield, to that remarkable model. I declare an interest, in that in a previous life it was a pleasure for me to meet Jan Tomasik, when he was in business in Glasgow. I found him to be an honourable man, who was committed to his home in Scotland while always being mindful of his Polish origins. It is no surprise to me to hear that he was whole-heartedly committed to the project. We recognise the efforts of Dr Trafas, the Polish consul general, and the incredible efforts of the young Polish geographers from the university in Krakow who contributed so much to the design and build of the map in 1975. The map serves to commemorate not only the crucial role of Polish forces in helping to defend Scotland during the second world war, but the warmth and hospitality with which Polish troops were greeted and with which a new generation has been greeted. It also reflects the warmth that Poles have brought to Scotland and the friendships that have been built here. I have been pleased to meet Graham Russell and Keith Burns of Mapa Scotland, and I went to see the map on several occasions in June and July, during the terrible rains. I could see the effect of the dampness on the map then. Mapa Scotland’s work is to be commended. The restoration of the great map is a significant project. The map is huge by any description—it is 50m by 40m—and it is a three-dimensional scale model of Scotland that includes its mountains, rivers, estuaries, coasts and seas. It has a gravity-driven water supply, and there is plenty of water supplying it. The project is large and daunting, but the map has fantastic potential. When it is restored, it could play a significant role in increasing tourism to the area. It could be used in an educational context to honour the historic links to which my friend Christine Grahame alluded. The project is therefore worth backing. I am very glad, as other members clearly are, that Historic Scotland has awarded the map B-listed status for its contribution to Scotland’s built heritage. That will help the restoration project as it moves forward, and I know that the volunteers who are involved in Mapa Scotland are delighted with the decision. The decision will also help to protect the map from any change of ownership at the Barony hotel in the future. That is a real concern, given that the hotel was recently on the market. The fact that it has now been sold and, under the auspices of an Edinburgh-based group, will be branded with Mercure signage by the end of next month is some comfort to all in South Scotland. I trust that the new owners will co-operate with the Polish community, Mapa Scotland and others to deliver a future for the map and the memories of all those involved.

4. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body what advice it sought regarding the proposed external screening facility. (S4O-01210)

I understand the sensitivities involved in this issue, but is the member able to share with the chamber the identified at-risk groups that use the Parliament and the responsibilities the corporate body faces in discharging that risk?

As outlined by John Lamont, the authority must comply with any direction—general or specific—that is given by the Scottish ministers. That is an outlandish power, which will be available to ministers in future Governments, and it is not clear how such a power might be used. Amendment 37 offers some comfort to the Parliament about the precise circumstances in which such directions might be given. Section 5(2) states: “A direction may not be given in respect of ... a specific operation being or to be carried out by the Police Service”. I presume that that acknowledges the operational independence that our society so welcomes and values. Nevertheless, a general or specific direction that is given by ministers could have an impact on the way in which the police carried out their operational duties. I ask the minister to give grave consideration to the amendment, which would offer comfort to the Parliament in the knowledge that we would have the opportunity to question a minister and be assured that a general or specific direction was necessary. It would also ensure that the Government was open to accepting some of the advice that was offered by people other than Government ministers.

Supporting John Lamont is becoming a habit with me, but I will try to break it as I go on. [Interruption.]

I am pleased to have awakened the Government benches. John Lamont has pointed out an important matter that members should take seriously, which is that we are going to upset a £1.4 billion business to its very foundations and move it forward in less than a year’s time. In the Justice Committee, we repeatedly invited witnesses to share with us the process for producing a full business case. As was said earlier, Kevin Smith indicated that his initial understanding had been that such a case would be produced by the Government but that he subsequently became aware that the service was to produce the full business case. He gave a commitment that that case would be made available as soon as reasonably possible and he said that he thought that the majority of the work would be completed within four weeks—that would have been in March this year. Last week, I asked the cabinet secretary whether he could share with us the business case that had been promised in the committee. After some fudging, I received a letter only yesterday that indicated that no business case was available yet and which referred me back to the service and indicated that it would prepare the business case. Amendment 39 is a reasonable amendment, because any organisation would want to have a comprehensive understanding of reorganisation costs and whether proposed savings were achievable. I invite the cabinet secretary to agree to the amendment.

Amendment 49 seeks to amend section 74 as it applies to Her Majesty’s inspectorate of constabulary for Scotland. The function of HMICS is to have the skills and experience necessary to act as a professional adviser not only to Government, but to chief officers. The functions of inspectors as laid out in section 74 do not refer specifically to the constables and police staff who are engaged in the policing of Scotland. Given the controversies that have occurred over the past few years with regard to the balance between police constables and support staff, and the unforeseen impact of the commitment to the additional 1,000 police officers, whereby more than 1,000 support staff have apparently gone missing from the service, it would be reasonable, not only for this Government but for future Governments, to include in the functions that HMICS could make inquiry about, the adequacy of the numbers of constables and police staff in ensuring that the objectives that are set out in the strategic policy priorities and local police plans are met. It would not be unreasonable to expect that HMICS could deliver on that. The knowledge that HMICS would be able to pay attention to matters in relation to staff and report accordingly would offer some comfort and support to those staff. Although such reports would not be mandatory, they would offer an independent and expert assessment of the current wellbeing of the police force at any one time. I move amendment 49.

I am disappointed at the cabinet secretary’s response. I press amendment 49.

For me, the amendments that I will speak to at this time are the most important amendments in relation to democratic accountability, and they have significance for all members sitting in the chamber who are not members of the Government. The amendments go to the very heart of how we hold a Government to account. It is about not only the Government that exists today but the Governments that will exist in the decades ahead. It has taken us 50 years to arrive at the creative changes that we propose in the bill, and members can be sure that it will be another 50 years before we revisit any mistakes that we make at this time. Given the decisions that members took earlier about local accountability and acknowledging Kevin Stewart’s comments about the shortcomings in democratic accountability in previous arrangements, we need to look at what we have agreed so far today and where it takes us. We have talked about the creation of a single police force, but it is more than a single police force: it is a national police force whose power, control, influence, direction and budget will be allocated at a national level. It will focus through the cabinet secretary, with direction to a convener who will be appointed by the cabinet secretary and a board that will be approved by the cabinet secretary, and it will be administered by a chief constable whom the board will appoint with the cabinet secretary’s approval. There is no democratic oversight in the current arrangement that we see, and we need to think about the impact of that. Elsewhere in the world, national law enforcement organisations have the opportunity to play free and wild with the power at their disposal. That is not the Scottish way. Policing by consent involves consent that is offered by the public. It enables police officers, who are warranted and empowered members of the public, to operate on our behalf. It does not involve merely agreement, compliance or knowing; it means that there is an understanding of what powers we allocate to law enforcers and the police service, and of how we administer them. Two months ago, I raised the focus of the amendments with the cabinet secretary. In fairness, he acknowledged his interest in the matters that I raised with him, and I was given an assurance that officials would come back to me to discuss the issue fully and that we would try to flesh it out. Unfortunately, that assurance was not followed through. I met the cabinet secretary and officials only last week and was given an assurance from him that, although he found it difficult to support my amendments, he would offer his support today for the principles that lie behind them and an alternative to those arrangements. It is beholden on members to ensure that the arrangements that we want to see in place are properly spelled out in the bill so that we will know the way forward with some confidence. That is not to say that we are challenging only this Government; we are challenging future Governments and future arrangements. John Finnie’s amendment 67, well meaning as it may be, would allow the Government to make arrangements for keeping under review the operation of the act and to publish reports to the Parliament on its efforts in that regard. That leaves a great deal to cabinet secretaries and Governments in deciding what is meant by keeping under review the operation of the act. My amendments on the provision of a commission set out clearly the criteria under which it would operate and would allow the Parliament to ensure that it behaved within the spirit and word of the legislation. Last night, the cabinet secretary raised with me the fact that the Lord Advocate understood that the provision of a commission could fetter the independent role of investigation, but that it might have been possible, had there been time, to address some of the concerns. I am surprised that the Government would take that view, given that the wording of my amendments reflects an approach that the Parliament took with the Scottish Commission for Public Audit, which was published and agreed in 2000. That commission has operated for the past 12 years with no apparent problem for the independence of the Lord Advocate and their role in the scheme of things. I hope that members will realise that, in light of the proposed dramatic changes to the police service, there is a pressing need for us as parliamentarians to provide proper and effective scrutiny of the arrangements and relationships that are created by a single police service. A blank-cheque approach will not provide parliamentarians with the confidence that there is effective scrutiny. Parliamentarians should realise that the issues are not political. We should co-operate collectively and seek consensus to give the general public confidence that we are up to the role that we seek to take in these matters; that we take seriously the policing of Scotland; that we support those who police on our behalf; and that we will ensure that they deliver in the spirit that we intend them to deliver. I move amendment 2.

It is wise to acknowledge that no Government in the world enjoys scrutiny. No Government invites appropriate and active scrutiny; it is inconvenient, it is difficult and it needs to be dealt with month in, month out. With amendments 2 and 4, we seek to achieve the ability to scrutinise the Government officials and executives who will be involved in the administration of policing in Scotland. John Finnie indicated that Parliament already has the opportunities and powers available to it. If we already have them, why do we not put a name to those opportunities and have our commission? Let us allow back benchers the opportunity to play their role responsibly. The notion that a commission operated by members of the Scottish Parliament would in some way cause challenges and difficulties is imagined and not likely to happen in the future. The construction of an alternative committee was mentioned. Like John Finnie, I have been in Parliament for only a year, so I am not completely aware of how that committee might be constructed and arranged. However, it is fair to acknowledge that, only last week, the cabinet secretary said to me that any alternative to the commission would not be a gold star response and would be second tier. That is the opportunity that John Finnie’s amendment 67 offers. There has been a lot of political noise about the various parties offering support to each other on this amendment. I would like to think that that is some evidence of a consensus in the views that members are sharing in the chamber. There will not be a member in this chamber who has not been approached by constituents who are worried about the changes and who want to know how democratic accountability will be delivered. Only within the past month, President Sarkozy left office and three French senior police officers were dismissed from service: the head of federal police, the head of city police, and the head of intelligence. The significance of that is that they were dismissed because they were seen as being too close to the Government and personally identified with the President. We cannot have changes to the police service occurring with changes of Government. I ask members to think about that. There needs to be a balance between the powers of the Government and the powers of the Parliament in order to reflect the will of the general public. Nigel Don asked what the difference would be between the proposed commission and an ordinary parliamentary committee. The commission would be appointed by the body of Parliament to reflect all the interests of the parties in this chamber in a balanced way—and not in a way that reflects Government influence. That would ensure that the commission calls the Government to account and that the police service operates as this Parliament would wish.

I point out that, if the member felt so strongly about it, we had the past eight weeks to discuss it at length. I am not an unreasonable person. What I want is a better police service, not a political advantage. I ask members to consider seriously my amendments 2 and 4, which I offer in good will. I believe that the option that was offered by John Finnie will not achieve what we seek to achieve for the future. I will press the amendments.

I will not prolong the debate. Enough has been said about open and transparent government, good governance and the need for openness in the publication of agendas and the way in which meetings are run and I believe that amendment 19 encourages the health of the administration of the SFRS and the police authority.

I say to the previous speaker that I had hoped that the Justice Committee was already earning its keep, but we always want to work harder. The purpose of the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill was set out in the financial memorandum, which made it clear that one of the main aspects related to the saving of money. At the beginning of the debates on the bill, it was indicated that those savings would amount to more than £100 million per annum, but the figure has been regulated down since then, hence the importance of the need for a full business case to give us some understanding of what we are trying to achieve, not only in terms of delivering a service, but in terms of how the financial picture plays out in the reality of government. This is not solely about regulating and holding to account a chief constable; it is important that the board that will oversee that individual behaves in a manner acceptable to this Parliament and the people of Scotland. My previous experience of such boards in the Scottish Police Services Authority does not fill me with confidence that the future for the Scottish police authority will be markedly different. I seem to remember that at board meetings we were assured that VAT would be exempted in due course; indeed, the minutes of those meetings would show that such a decision had been well made and that we were just waiting for the exemption. It was a bit like waiting for Santa Claus at Christmas time; I stood at the close, I watched the chimney but I never saw him arrive. The same goes for VAT. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has acknowledged my point about the threat of a Government abusing its oversight function. There is no doubt that good governance and oversight will be essential to a national police force’s management, and I am certain that the set-up of the proposed parliamentary committee to review the act’s operation will be of deep interest not only to me but to other MSPs. The Scottish Labour Party has already declared its commitment to a single police force with a slimmed-down executive, a focus on street-level service delivery and democratic accountability fit for the 21st century. As has been said, the current arrangements, which are set out in the Police (Scotland) Act 1967, were designed for a completely different time. Not only has the internet changed the world, but mobile phones, international travel, migration and immigration have all affected the way in which police officers operate on our streets. Ensuring that accountability reflects that new reality should be the Parliament’s focus. The Government now has the task of working out its priorities and putting in place the management and oversight of the police and fire services. The Parliament must ensure not only that all of that is in good health, but that it is all done in a good light, legally, ethically, morally and in our communities’ best interests. I will contribute as best I can to that endeavour and the deliberations that the cabinet secretary intends to have and I hope that, with good will, he delivers what we sought in the first place.

I hope that the member will acknowledge that the support staff who help police officers to deliver services are equally important and that the loss of 1,000 from their number is a concern.

I thank colleagues on the Justice Committee for the time and effort that they took to help me to understand some of the complexities of the bill. I also thank the witnesses who took the time to come to the committee and who patiently took us through the steps and explained the complexities and almost unfathomable detail of part 1 of the bill, and the critical part that it will play in the administration of justice. It is important that sentencing be safely conducted in the knowledge that appeals against sentencing will be maintained at a minimum. I am sorry that Mr Finnie found Jenny Marra’s criticism to be slightly irksome, but it is important that we understand some of the shortcomings that still exist in the process, so that the next legislation can address them more competently.

I accept that. As Mr Finnie knows, the sheer complexity of what the committee faced left us exhausted and without alternative solutions to consider in the timescales that were available to us. Additional victims legislation is due to come before Parliament, and one hopes that we could consider some unfinished business in the longer term. Part 1 of the Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill seeks to address an inconsistency in the law, “whereby a life prisoner is likely to have a parole hearing earlier than a non-life prisoner sentenced for a similar crime”, if the punishment part of the sentencing process of the non-mandatory life sentence is not properly considered and recorded. Although some evidence at stage 1 expressed concerns that the bill would add complexity to an already highly convoluted area of law, the area does require considerable attention. Evidence from witnesses, in particular from Joanna Cherry QC, indicated that “it is not just lay people who find the legislation extremely difficult to understand. I am sure that it is an issue for the Parliament that legislation should be readily understandable to the public, particularly legislation to do with ... sentencing”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 31 January 2012; c 865.] That was a “strong factor” in her concern about the bill. It is important that witnesses and victims who come before our courts should leave them in the full knowledge that they have received the information that they deem to be necessary to understand the system. It is true that some witnesses want to know very little of the outcome, but others want to understand the rationale that lies behind it. There is a duty on Parliament to ensure that legislation provides for judges to offer sufficient information in the public courts. Sir Gerald Gordon QC, who is the author of “The Criminal Law of Scotland”—a seminal document in terms of the application of criminal justice in Scotland—echoed Joanna Cherry’s sentiments in acknowledging that even legal experts and members of the judiciary would struggle to understand all the provisions. Michael Meehan added that “The bill complicates matters by requiring judges not only to consider the sentence that they will impose but to conduct a parallel notional sentence exercise.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 31 January 2012; c 866.] All that said, the challenges that were faced by the cabinet secretary in the circumstances of Petch and Foye were overwhelming and needed an immediate sensible response. To that extent, the bill puts us on a better footing and makes us able to defend, in any appeal, the processes that are administered by our judges. As has been alluded to, part 2 of the bill has to some extent been superseded by the publication in March in the Sunday Herald of the SCCRC report, and the subsequent death of al-Megrahi further weakens the need for the legislation. Although we were told that it could be applied in cases other than the al-Megrahi case, it has never been fully articulated in what other circumstances the legislation could be used. In any case, it is useful that facts that are gathered by the SCCRC as part of its process, and which are subsequently abandoned for whatever reason, could be made public in a fair and worthwhile manner in the future. As a result, I support the proposals that are outlined in the bill and I support the motion. [Interruption.]

I thank Rob Gibson for setting the scene for my speech. The use of, access to and ownership of land are subjects that are bound to generate substantial interest and concern. I am supportive of the measures in the bill. I recognise, like others, that the bill ties up some loose ends that were created by the 1991 and 2003 acts, which is to be welcomed. The cabinet secretary has already covered what the bill is designed to do, so I will avoid going over the same ground. The scope of the bill is extremely narrow and it does not impact on some of the issues that continue to affect tenant farmers—certainly those to whom I have spoken in the south of Scotland. Issues such as dispute resolution, waygo payments and the establishment of a code of conduct are yet to be resolved. The issues of investment in holdings and waygo payments are important ones. In its report, the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee urged the Scottish Government to re-examine the issue of investment in holdings so that tenant farmers and landowners could have clarity about their responsibilities with regard to what they should be paying for and when such payments should be made. The committee also reported that clarity is urgently needed regarding the compensation that is paid to outgoing or retiring tenants in recognition of the investment that they have made to their holding during their tenancy. Moves to establish a code of conduct for land agents would be a welcome step. During the evidence gathering for the bill, the committee heard concerns about inconsistencies in the behaviour and conduct of some land agents. Although the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors Scotland issued rigorous guidance for its agents, not all land agents are members of the RICS. The committee recognised the tension and conflict that can arise in relationships between land agents and tenants and, as a consequence, recommended that a code of practice for the industry be developed and that the Scottish Government should monitor the development of the code to ensure that it is fit for purpose. When there is conflict, effective dispute resolution is required. Although I agree with Alex Fergusson’s point about “jaw-jaw”, time is of the essence and, given the age profile of those who currently engage in farming, we need to attract young people to the industry now. Many organisations that gave evidence to the committee testified that alternatives are needed to the Scottish Land Court as a means of resolving disputes. As a consequence, the committee recommended that the Scottish Government work with the tenant farming forum to introduce proposals for improving dispute resolution as a matter of urgency. Much of the best practice in Scotland in the arena of land ownership relies on personal relationships and good people doing the right thing by one another, rather than well-considered structures and systems. Such systems are designed to support people who do a difficult job in an important industry on which Scotland relies. The absence of dependability in the area ensures that those who engage in financing and supporting farming in Scotland—the banks and other institutions—find it difficult to provide finance for prospective tenants who are interested in developing farming for the future. I welcome the bill and the cabinet secretary’s announcement this morning of the creation of a new group on rent reviews that will report to the tenant farming forum. I urge the Scottish Government to introduce additional measures as soon as possible to address the significant remaining challenges that face tenant farmers and the industry in general. Until we can attract young people into the industry and prove that it has a future, we will always find it difficult to support those who work so hard on our behalf, day and night for 52 weeks of the year.

I congratulate Elaine Murray on bringing the debate to the Parliament and for maintaining interest in the issue for such a long time, in the face of a series of hurdles. I will talk about my experience of driving the A75 as I cover the South Scotland region on behalf of constituents. The road is part of designated European route 18, so we would expect it to be fit for purpose. My experience is that it is not fit for purpose, given the carriageway configuration, the traffic volumes, the speeds that are attained by vehicles, and the traffic mix that uses the road every day. The road is used by drivers of agricultural and heavy goods vehicles, overseas visitors who are strangers to our country and our culture, tourists from across the United Kingdom, cyclists and locals, who are perhaps lulled into confidence by their familiarity with the road, all of whom end up facing a range of challenges that make it more likely that there will be confusion and road traffic accidents. We can add to that mix the discipline of the ferry timetable, which creates additional pressure for some drivers who use the designated Euro route, which is maintained not by Dumfries and Galloway Council but by Amey Highways. There is evidence that road redesign and maintenance can reduce road traffic accidents. The upgrade of the A75 between Gretna and Dumfries halved road traffic accidents and was considered to be highly successful in making the road safer for people to use. It is therefore difficult to comprehend the Government’s decision to abandon further upgrades and a shovel-ready project between Hardgrove and Kinmount. The upgrade would cost £10.2 million. Only today, we heard from the Auditor General for Scotland that more than £20 million was lost to the public services through fraud. There is an ability to identify cash when a critical project needs support. It is unfortunate that Joan McAlpine has gone through the history and politics of the matter. The people who use the A75 are concerned for their relatives, their friends and other users of the road, and they are concerned about the misery and death that have been caused by the use of the road. No road is dangerous; it is the way in which people use a road that makes it dangerous. It is within our gift to try to design roads to ensure that only the most reckless face the risk of a fatal accident. It is important that improvements to the A75, which is a significant trans-Scotland route, are made. Members should not take just my word for it; they should listen to the words of a 15-year-old boy who e-mailed me at the beginning of April, not knowing that the debate would take place. He wrote: “The road is literally falling in on itself. It does not take a genius to work out that the foundations of the road are giving way, causing holes in the road, not just holes in the surface.” Given that a 15-year-old felt so moved as to e-mail me on the issue, I hope that the minister will try to find a means of prioritising the fixing of this dangerous road.

5. To ask the First Minister what progress is being made with the criminal investigation of the Lockerbie bombing. (S4F-00693)

I thank the First Minister for that reply, and note his earlier replies on the matter and his continued declarations of open government. Would he be surprised to know that, following my unanswered questions in the chamber on 29 February, I wrote to the Cabinet Secretary for Justice to request specific facts about his visit to Greenock prison, the meeting between departmental officials and Libyan representatives and his view on a possible conflict of interest in those matters? In spite of repeated reminders, I had to wait for 70 days, before finally submitting an additional freedom of information request and receiving a refusal of my request within hours. How does the First Minister intend to repair the damage that has been done to Scotland’s reputation for justice and good governance if he cannot demonstrate the accountability of his Government to this Parliament and to members in the chamber?

I thank Jackie Baillie for covering most of the ground on the thinking behind Labour’s approach to the bill. Equally, I thank Sandra White and Bob Doris, who have outlined many of the problems on which the bill seeks to deliver. In that context, it is unkind of the cabinet secretary to describe our position as “ridiculous” and embarrassing. As rehearsed at stage 3 and in this debate, it is true to say that Scottish Labour members still have legitimate reservations about the bill. It is not just about the windfall that we have discussed; concerns have also been expressed by the Conservatives about the bill’s compliance with European law, which is why we have asked repeatedly for access to the legal advice that the Government obtained earlier. It has been tricky to nail that down. Nevertheless, the cabinet secretary remains adamant that the measure is legal, so I welcome her voluntary reference to the EU and the impact of the act, should the bill be enacted at the end of the day. As the bill stands, it will generate a significant windfall. Whether it be £68 million, £98 million or £125 million, most of it will end up benefiting the largest supermarkets. I would like to see that money go to treatment, diversionary activities for young people, policing and the cleaning up of areas that are affected by considerable alcohol consumption and antisocial behaviour. As the cabinet secretary herself said during the stage 1 debate, mechanisms are available that could deal with the windfall so, if the Scottish Government accepts our amendment, we will add our support to the bill. I am pleased to note that the latest figures on alcohol-related admissions to hospitals show a fall for the second year in a row. However, we recognise that that is only one of many measurements of success in the future, and action still needs to be taken to combat the problems that alcohol causes in our communities. The cabinet secretary has continually criticised Labour, but we have launched a consultation on a range of measures that are designed to help to tackle the problems that alcohol can and is causing in many of our communities. The cabinet secretary did not seek to engage in that consultation. Was there no merit in our consultation at all? Does the cabinet secretary not think that all, or some of, alcohol arrest referral, banning orders, bottle-tagging, alcohol drug treatment and testing orders, and alcohol fine diversions could play a part in addressing the problems in the future? Surely she does not think that minimum pricing is the magic bullet? More has to be done and we are keen to play a role in that. I trust that the Government will rethink its position. Before coming into the chamber this afternoon, I had a look at a poll that is being conducted by The Scotsman. Of 15,500 people who have contributed to that poll, 93 have indicated that they do not believe that the provisions of the bill will be effective by themselves. We need to think about what the public is saying to us in that poll.

I support the amendment in Jackie Baillie’s name.

Would the cabinet secretary be good enough to acknowledge that crime rates have fallen across Europe and that, in America, they are approaching a 50-year low? Does he agree that, therefore, to claim that the situation in Scotland is entirely down to the additional 1,000 officers is less than candid?

The effective delivery of policing requires, among other things, the Government to provide confidence to police and police staff about their future in respect of employment and support, and it needs the Government to acknowledge that the principles of public service, integrity, team ethos and vocation are vital ingredients in ensuring that staff act in the spirit of public service. It also needs the recognition that value for money means paying the going rate for the jobs that are undertaken, and it needs efficiencies to ensure that the person with the required skills is engaged on the appropriate duties. Underlying those concepts is the additional responsibility on Government to respond to staff by showing exemplary fairness and loyalty to those who are currently employed across the police service, to leave all staff in no doubt that decisions about their future will be made on the basis of what is best for the future of policing across Scotland and not on the basis of a one-sided political commitment to maintaining police numbers while eliminating less visible support jobs. Had the Government candidly admitted that 1,000 additional constables would result in at least 1,000 back-office jobs going—according to the unions, the figure is up to 3,000—I think that MSPs would have been less gushing in their support. No one would argue that the maintenance of police numbers is not a good result, but the fairytale that lies behind that fact is the loss of many more jobs behind the scene. The sleight of hand involved would play well as merely a confidence trick if it were not for the fact that so many valuable staff are being let go and others demotivated by the very processes that should be enthusing staff as they move towards a single police force. Members should be in no doubt that these are staff cuts—and cuts they are, no matter what variation of the English language people try to use. They are directly linked to the savings targeted by this Government; they are not demanded by the creation of a single police force. We have heard members quote eminent witnesses who provided the Justice Committee with evidence. The most accurate staff numbers that I can uncover are for the period up to December 2011—unfortunately, the most recent figures will not be released until next month. The figures reveal that we have lost 905 posts. In Central Scotland, the area policed by Kevin Smith, a third of staff have been lost. The complement has fallen to 299 people. Surely we cannot continue with the delusion that the work done by 905 people can be done by the remaining back-office staff. Surely the claims of efficiency made by this Government in relation to the management of staff over the years mean something—surely they mean that, across policing, current staff were and are fully utilised in their own work and are not available to soak up new duties. The evidence gained from staff across the forces indicates that they are losing staff involved in warrants, intelligence analysis, football monitoring duties, custody, HR support, media services duties and firearms certification. We need to show support and to have a balanced police service. The service needs effective staff to support police officers, who should be out on the street fighting crime, not fighting paperwork and answering phones.

I am obliged to the member for giving way, as I know that time is tight for him. Would he be more comfortable with his position if he had confidence and knew that the Government and ACPOS were focusing on saving the kind of money that has been spent on projects such as the performance management platform, on which The Scotsman reported this week almost £7 million has been spent but which has not been delivered?

There is no mean spirit intended. I ask Jamie Hepburn to deal with the reality outside the chamber and not to make a soundbite out of it. To connect those two statistics is just wrong. We need to deal with reality as it is.

As a member of the Justice Committee, I am pleased to associate myself with the comments and recommendations in the report. We gathered an abundance of evidence that identified various areas in which positive decisions and sensible resolution are needed. Many of the recommendations have already been commented on and, given the time that is available, I will not be able to analyse in depth all that has been said. Suffice to say, the bill must not only deliver the cost cutting that the SNP Government seeks; more important, it must deliver at a community level by improving police and fire services for the people and communities of Scotland. The Government has a duty to provide a credible strategic vision to deliver the difference. Lewis Macdonald maintained that we are talking about a once-in-a-generation change. In my view, the bill proposes the most fundamental changes to the police and fire services in more than 200 years. The end of the current tripartite arrangements prepares the ground for a slimmed-down hierarchy but creates new accountability, governance and scrutiny challenges. A national police service demands significant and effective democratic oversight. Various witnesses, including Robert Black, in particular, identified the need for proper governance. The Auditor General spoke powerfully in connection with what he described as a “democratic deficit” in the bill’s arrangements, particularly in regard to policing—a vacuum in the way in which democratic accountability is delivered in the bill. Should any cabinet secretary exercise powers to appoint, to pay, to obtain reports from a chief constable, convener and board, to sack a chief constable and to provide the police and fire services with their budgets, all through a civil service that is outwith the immediate oversight of a democratically elected group? The police exercise powers to arrest, to use force, to detain, to report for consideration of prosecution and to aid the conviction of a citizen. Would it not be proper for those functions to attract the highest level of democratic accountability? In Scotland, that should mean a proactive role for the Parliament. Policing requires the consent of the public, and that consent is built on the knowledge that elected representatives at the national level effectively oversee the professionals concerned in the management and oversight of the police and fire services. The Scottish police authority is not designed to offer democratic accountability and nor is it likely to do so, although it should be capable of effective governance of policing, as should its sister board in relation to fire and rescue. The Government suggests that the Justice Committee could deal with accountability issues. Alternative views have been expressed on that today. In my view, the Justice Committee has neither the available time nor the current focus to call to account the police, fire and associated bodies in the bill on an on-going basis, particularly in the initial years, as will be necessary to deliver properly for our communities. Equally, an ad hoc committee of the Parliament would be an insufficient response to deliver on these most important areas of public policy in action. The way forward is to set up a commission of the Parliament, similar to the arrangements for the Auditor General, that is designed to operate in a non-partisan fashion and is tasked with proactively seeking appropriate evidence from witnesses on the arrangements that affect those who are responsible for the range of services that are covered in the bill. I seek confirmation from the cabinet secretary that local police and fire and rescue boards will be made fully aware of the full range of resources that are currently provided in local authority areas and that support staff will receive the same support and job security that are currently extended to police officers. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will know about the growing concern in many areas that, without proper monitoring of the resources and services that are now provided, those areas will lose out. Will he therefore ensure that a comprehensive assessment is carried out for each board area to allay those fears? Little has been said about the support from forensic services or about those who will provide information technology support for the new single police force. It is imperative that the cabinet secretary reaffirms the absolute need for independence in respect of the preparation and delivery of forensic services, as requested, for police and fire services. Concerns were recently raised in the High Court about the process of forensic reporting, which is worrying. The cabinet secretary’s planned arrangements for the future should take account of those concerns and ensure that there is no repetition of those worries. The arrangements for the SPSA integration provide little evidence on the IT solutions to unify the different reporting and recording systems in the eight separate police services and fire brigades. We need more detail and greater urgency on that. It has been reported in the press that a salary in the region of £200,000 will be allocated to the heads of service. Does the cabinet secretary believe that those heads need such a salary, particularly in the current severe financial times? I do not think that they do and I do not think that the public believe so, either.

The member mentioned the example of Northern Ireland. Is he aware that the people who formed the board in Northern Ireland are all elected members of the Northern Ireland Assembly?

2. To ask the Scottish Executive what action it will take to meet the international goals agreed in the North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization “Guidance on Best Management Practices to address impacts of sea lice and escaped salmon on wild salmon stocks”. (S4O-00990)

As the minister will be aware, NASCO utilises four focus area reports in monitoring this issue and, according to its recent report, “progress towards achieving the international goals for sea lice and containment” had not been demonstrated in Scotland. Does the minister recognise that the reporting of lice levels on individual farms is fundamental in demonstrating progress towards achieving the international goals for sea lice?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive when it will publish its further consultation on prison visiting committees. (S4O-00915)

Will the cabinet secretary confirm that he is aware of the comments of HM Chief Inspector of Prisons, Brigadier Monro, that he was not consulted on the decision to disband the visiting committees and replace them with an advocacy service? He has recorded his real concern that Scotland’s prisons must continue to be regularly and effectively monitored by an independent service. Will those comments carry some weight in the consultation process?

I note John Finnie’s light touch in describing part 1 as “the easy bit”. On that basis, I look forward to his forthcoming book, “A Treatise on Scots Law”, because there is no doubt that if he found part 1 easy to understand, it would be a fascinating book to read. The Criminal Cases (Punishment and Review) (Scotland) Bill is one piece of legislation with a title that trips off the tongue. Members who have followed the committee’s deliberations will know the torrid time that we faced together in trying to understand the complexities that are involved in simplifying the process at solemn procedure when judges calculate the punishment part of a non-mandatory life sentence, which is dealt with in part 1. It is satisfying to note that, nonetheless, the committee came to support the aims of part 1 in seeking to address the anomaly that was identified through Petch and Foye v HM Advocate in 2011, whereby a life prisoner is likely to have a parole hearing earlier than a non-life prisoner who has been sentenced for a similar crime. During our committee meetings, witnesses said much that evidenced the unsatisfactory nature of current sentencing guidelines; indeed, the cabinet secretary himself acknowledged that the bill was meant to be an immediate fix to the Petch and Foye challenge and did not seek to address the structure of custodial sentencing more broadly. To that extent, the bill is disappointing in its ambitions. I hope that, as was alluded to by the cabinet secretary, the Government will consider further work in a reasonable timescale to address the wider issues affecting sentencing in order to ensure not only that judges can understand the procedures that are involved but—more important—that victims, witnesses and the general public can understand the system. I hope that the cabinet secretary will be able to address that outstanding matter. I would like to see in the future the delivery of sentences that not only leave no doubt in the mind of the public about how a sentence is arrived at, but which announce the earliest date of release for a prisoner. That will give clarity and some comfort to people who are affected because they will be safe in the knowledge that an offender will not be on the streets in a free capacity before the said date. Joanna Cherry QC said in her evidence to the committee that “it is not just lay people who find the legislation extremely difficult to understand ... I am sure that it is an issue for the Parliament that legislation should be readily understandable to the public, particularly legislation to do with ... sentencing ... That is a strong factor in our concern about the bill’s complexity.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 31 January 2012; c 865.] Sir Gerald Gordon QC echoed those sentiments when he acknowledged that even legal experts and members of the judiciary would struggle to understand all the provisions. Michael Meehan added that “The bill complicates matters by requiring judges not only to consider the sentence that they will impose but to conduct a parallel notional sentence exercise.”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 31 January 2012; c 866.] Despite those reservations, I accept the authorities’ need to take steps to respond to the identified problem. In connection with that, I suggest that the cabinet secretary encourage the authorities to draw up an aide mémoire, written in everyday language, that is designed to explain to members of the public who are attending court exactly what the sentencing procedure is and how judges decide sentences. Such documentation would—alongside Victim Support and other agencies—assist people to understand the processes. With regard to part 2, events in respect of Megrahi have overtaken the import of our discussions on the matter. Part 2 seeks to establish a framework for the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission and, as other members have outlined, we have a greater understanding of some of the perceived hurdles and the real pathways forward. Nevertheless, it is troubling to acknowledge that a reporter who is based at The Herald newspaper in Glasgow has greater latitude to manoeuvre to allow publication of a report from the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission than is available to the First Minister and his Government. A subsequent update to legal advice has indicated that previous reservations with regard to data protection and other issues were ill-founded. Although it is difficult to identify a purpose for that part of the bill now, the Government continues to press for its enactment. I well understand, with regard to Christine Grahame’s contribution, the wrecking impact of our committee seeking to interfere with that process. Nevertheless, it is useful to acknowledge that, during conversations in committee and in taking evidence, Len Murray, who is a highly respected lawyer, said that in his view the bill could create as many difficulties as it might solve, and Ian McKie commented that the current legislation and the bill as drafted would inhibit rather than assist the release of information. Both appeared before the committee as members of the justice for Megrahi campaign. Whatever their view, and the outcome, the SCCRC raised one practical issue regarding its ability to deal with financial costs. I hope that the Government will take account of that observation and respond to it in due course.

I thank the minister on two levels. First, I thank her for her fair presentation of the proposal that is set out in the consultation document on a new tribunal system for Scotland. Secondly, I thank her for offering an opportunity to David McLetchie to link his name with the concept of glamour. I never thought that I would witness that in my lifetime, let alone see him dismiss the offer so quickly. That is perhaps a sign of uncharacteristic shyness on his part—only time will tell. Tribunals will never be an attractive subject to debate in the Parliament, but all members who are present know the importance of the work that tribunals do on behalf of society. The use of tribunals as a method of achieving a resolution for members of the public and the authorities in a dispute, or of seeking justice in relation to broader public issues, is an important means of empowering the citizen and ensuring a proportionate response to issues that are raised. Tribunal decisions are an effective means of influencing the actions and processes of public bodies. As we have heard, there are more than 40 tribunals in Scotland. They seek to adjudicate on issues and to referee between competing panels or sides. They decide matters that are of great significance to individuals and their futures, agreeing on additional support, employment rights, land ownership and much more using not only the law, but specialist technical advice. Tribunals operate daily across Scotland dealing with a huge range of administrative and public law issues of significance to the state and the individual. Whether it is through an employment tribunal, the Lands Tribunal for Scotland, the Office of the Public Guardian (Scotland), the VAT and Duties Tribunal in Scotland, the Additional Support Needs Tribunals for Scotland, or the Scottish Charity Appeals Panel—to name but a few—the means by which justice is delivered should be important to us all. The tribunals’ cases are many and—given the subject areas that are dealt with—they have a high impact on the people involved. However, for the most part the tribunals are staffed and transact their business outwith the public gaze, in a way that belies their importance. The array of the many tribunals—some maintained within the UK jurisdiction and others discrete in their Scottish delivery—is confusing, not merely for the public, but for some of the professionals involved. Sir Andrew Leggatt commented on that. The current proposals benefit from Lord Philip’s and Lord Gill’s reports. They are to be welcomed in that light, in that they begin to move this area of public law into the mainstream of delivering justice. The Government consultation sets out a number of proposals for a new system for Scotland: a single unified system; independence for tribunal judiciary; the creation of a leadership role for the Lord President of the Court of Session and a new president of Scottish tribunals; an opportunity to integrate the UK’s system of tribunals with Scotland’s system; and the provision of an upper-tier tribunal able to deal with appeals emanating from the first-tier tribunal. A single unified system will build on the streamlining of administrative support and make better use of the resources at the Scottish Tribunals Service. At a time of economic challenge, such moves can be useful as long as they focus on smarter working and service delivery and avoid the attraction of cost cutting for savings’ sake. The declared independence of those who are engaged in judging matters across the landscape of tribunals in Scotland is not only essential; for many, it is an issue that should have been resolved years ago. The allocation of a role for the Lord President and the creation of a new president of Scottish tribunals reflect not only a bold job-creation exercise but, more important, a significant shift in acknowledging the important work undertaken by those in tribunals and the efforts required to drive up and maintain standards in the judgments and procedures adopted in this area of arbitration. Finally, appropriate integration of tribunal processes and support offers significant savings and consistency of outcomes. That professional support was hitherto delivered on the basis of good staff and committed people, rather than in conjunction with good systems and structures. I welcome the placing of tribunals in a truly independent position by the reinforcement of an important sterile area between those administering judgments and those with Government influence. That independence is crucial, because many citizens are keen to have their cases decided on the benefit of the evidence before the tribunal and not because of governmental influence—imagined or not—that is brought to bear on those who administer the service on behalf of the Executive. Members will have cases of constituents who believe that their circumstances have been misunderstood or misrepresented by those in power. Tribunals need to be seen to adjudicate on the evidence alone. The proposals that are contained in the consultation that we are debating should contribute to that result. For justice to be done, it must be seen to be done. I support the motion and the Labour amendment.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what the average length of time and dosage is for a course of methadone. (S4O-00826)

The Government spends more than £28 million a year delivering methadone maintenance treatment to more than 22,000 people, many of whom can be on methadone for 10 years or longer. At the same time, residential treatment units such as Castle Craig Hospital in West Linton in my region have seen a substantial fall in the number of patients who are referred to them. The hospital relies on patients from Holland, who are paid for by the private sector there, to support service provision. What strategies does the cabinet secretary have and what targets has he set to reduce drug dependency in Scotland?

Unfortunately, I must begin my contribution by agreeing with Christine Grahame and acknowledging all that she said about the 218 project in Glasgow. It is an excellent project that tackles reoffending, and it is well worth supporting. Today’s debate is rightly concerned with rehabilitation. I welcome Alison McInnes’s interest in that area and in particular her efforts in respect of the women’s prison at Cornton Vale. As other members have acknowledged, the purpose of a prison service is to hold prisoners safely in a secure environment, to punish them, to ensure the public’s safety, and—just as important—to address reoffending through education and other programmes. I have already stated in the chamber my admiration for the work that is carried out across the prison sector in delivering the first two elements of a prison service’s duties. Unfortunately, however, evidence of success in addressing reoffending is thin on the ground and, despite regular pronouncements to the contrary, a great deal of effort is required in that regard. At the Justice Committee we have heard much about the management of overcrowded prison facilities and the introduction to the system of additional capacity, including the new prison at Low Moss, which is to be welcomed. However, questions on the literacy and numeracy courses that are delivered received broad-brush responses that lacked detail on precisely how the Scottish Prison Service intends to deliver satisfactory courses against achievable targets and to publish results. The most recent figures show that the rate of reoffending within two years of liberation stands at 42.4 per cent, yet Her Majesty’s chief inspector of Prisons, Hugh Monro, has regularly commented on the significant amount of time that prisoners of all ages spend inactive in their cells, avoiding opportunities for improvement. The challenge for the authorities is to tackle that and to provide the kinds of courses that deliver success. As members have pointed out, that will be no easy task, but it is a prize worth winning. Literacy and numeracy levels across the prison population remain stubbornly low, leaving the majority of prisoners incapable of filling in application forms or dealing with job interviews after release. That is not a good outcome in what is an already depressed employment market. Much has been said about social impact bonds. If the model can be shown to deliver success while maintaining the necessary security within prisons, why should it not be used? However, that will be a matter for the authorities and I hope that the cabinet secretary will tell us how he intends to encourage results from the initiatives that he announced today and outlined in his speech. The key demand is that the authorities focus and take steps to deliver on reoffending rates. Prisoner release dates should be linked to successful prisoner participation in education and behaviour improvement courses. Moreover, prisons should be empowered to reduce methadone programmes for each prisoner over the period of their sentence. The return of men and women to our communities with little home support or little evidence of educational improvement and without a new-found independence from methadone creates the fertile circumstances that prepare them for reoffending. In her motion, Alison McInnes draws proper attention to the issues and challenges that the authorities must respond to. I support the motion and welcome the cabinet secretary’s positive approach in his opening speech.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive how many police support staff are employed across the country. (S4O-00795)

The cabinet secretary will know that that is nearly 1,000 fewer staff than were in post two years previously. Will he take steps to ensure that the police service is not damaged by a significant loss of skills and experience in an effort to deliver Government efficiency savings?

It is with some concern that I enter the debate. Over the decades, I have become used to the notion that when alcohol is present in any discussion it can cause violence and upset. This is the only chamber that I am aware of in which people get upset, tending towards violence, even when they are simply discussing alcohol. I hope that we are beginning to arrive at a sober conclusion as we take matters forward. We are definitely dealing with a conundrum wrapped up in a quandary. A commercial business and industry competes to deliver higher volumes of its product to citizens who are determined in their endeavours to consume that product, while civic and public Scotland tire of paying the price for that consumption in terms of ill health—and, indeed, death—criminality, social disruption, family breakdown and the heartache that goes along with that.

The views that I have expressed thus far are based on my experience of nearly 40 years in law enforcement. The member is familiar with the debates that have taken place in the Parliament and I hope that he accepts that, although we may separate in our views on the way forward, our views are honestly held and the background to them is firmly researched. We all know that we face a challenge that has caused problems for centuries, such as those depicted in Hogarth’s 18th century “Gin Lane”, which led to the creation of the Salvation Army, the Pioneers and Alcoholics Anonymous to name but a few. The problem is well known to us and is broadly recognised. The time is right to deliver some responses. I welcome the cabinet secretary’s inviting of contributions to the strategy to deal with the abuse of alcohol. In that connection, on behalf of the Scottish Labour Party, I offer six proposals that are informing our considerations as we prepare for a bill that will include justice provisions that are designed to deliver a positive outcome on the issue. The cabinet secretary is quite right to say that there is no silver bullet. No one is confident that the solutions are to hand. Those who abuse alcohol seem to be completely committed to destroying their lives by doing so, regardless of the evidence that is provided to them. We suggest that consideration should be given to the introduction of alcohol bottle tagging. That development, which was piloted in Dundee city, was found to be most useful in identifying those premises that were the source of liquor for young people who abused it in a binge fashion in various public areas away from overall review. We propose, and invite consideration of the idea, that alcohol fine diversion is a way forward. Rather than criminalise those who are found to be indulging in alcohol abuse, we should, at an early stage of their involvement with alcohol, divert them towards an education process involving a series of courses and support, much as we do with speeding drivers. That would give them the opportunity to consider their position before they become involved in the heartbreak of a lifelong indulgence in alcohol. We propose the creation of an alcohol arrest referral scheme, alongside the drug referral scheme. That would allow people who sit in our cells regularly of a weekend at times of crisis to take the opportunity to seek advice and support. Drinking banning orders could be applied to individuals who have been identified by the courts not only to have engaged in criminality, but to have abused alcohol in a public place. Breaches of those banning orders would bring them back before the courts. That measure would focus on the source of many of those people’s problems. We also propose alcohol treatment and testing orders as an extension of the current drug treatment and testing orders. If we think that those who engage in drug abuse should be subjected to regular testing and that that has a significant effect in disciplining their lifestyle and bringing them back to a healthy way of living, why should we not apply the same rigours to those who engage in alcohol abuse, which kills many more people in our communities?

We are here to debate our way forward in that regard, and I have no doubt that, at the debate’s conclusion, we will all make our choices. Alcohol offences information sharing is a final element of the proposal with regard to justice. It would be the courts’ responsibility to refer the details of those who are convicted of an offence to their general practitioner. There would be no need to share the detail of the offence, but an awareness that alcohol played a major part in the circumstances would allow for intervention.

I support the Labour Party’s proposals and I am grateful to be able to make my contribution.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive how many schools have indicated a wish to delay the introduction of the new national exams and how it plans to assist these schools. (S4O-00773)

Does the cabinet secretary accept that his aggressive attitude towards those who offer concerns about the curriculum for excellence is reducing the current debate to a negative argument that is alienating many teachers, whom we rely on to improve the life chances of our young people? Does he accept that his decision to allow East Renfrewshire education department to take an alternative path complicates matters, given the views that many have expressed, including the general secretary of the Scottish Secondary Teachers Association, who wants the examinations to be delayed to allow the much-needed curriculum for excellence to commence in an effective and meaningful manner?

Will the cabinet secretary outline to Parliament his specific reasons for meeting al-Megrahi at Greenock prison? Does he now recognise that, in the minds of some people, his handling of that process lends credence to the current controversy over the deal in respect of the subsequent withdrawal of al-Megrahi’s then imminent appeal? Will he publish all briefing papers leading up to that prison visit? I understand that, prior to the decision to liberate al-Megrahi on compassionate grounds, negotiations and contacts were maintained between the Scottish Executive’s civil servants and representatives of the then Libyan Government regarding al-Megrahi’s release. Was there any conflict of interests, given the other roles and responsibilities of civil servants, and will he publish the papers?

I declare an interest as the previous director general of the Scottish Crime and Drug Enforcement Agency, and the first law enforcement officer in Scotland to focus on human trafficking as a major problem, based on my experience elsewhere in Europe and the world. It is always more comfortable to speak in the chamber when there is cross-party agreement on an issue, and it is salutary for anybody outside this building to know that Parliament is unified in its acknowledgement of the problem of human trafficking and in its disgust for those who engage in it. The debate is timely for me. Only last month I was asked by a defence agent to visit a young man on remand in Barlinnie prison who was awaiting trial for engagement in organised crime on a cannabis farm. I agreed to see him. He had been brought to this country by an organisation that he described as snakeheads—an organised crime group from China. He had been brought here in the belief that he would be able to earn a living somewhere in Europe, so he did not know that he would end up in Scotland. He was in abject poverty, had lived in Scotland for more than two years, had one other associate in the country whom he deemed a friend, could not speak English, was completely powerless, had no official documents, and lived life in debt to the organisation. On a week-to-week basis, he was delegated work selling counterfeit DVDs and, in the interim, looked after cannabis farms at the behest of the gang. When he initially decided that he would not become involved in that criminality, he was attacked with machetes and spent time in the Southern general hospital being treated for the wounds that he suffered, which I saw with my own eyes. He was obviously in poverty. His clothes were of the lowest standard. He had no contact from outside the prison—he received no letters or telephone calls—and, other than the solicitor who represented him, no one offered him any support. There is no doubt that he is a victim. He was brought to this country by alleged human beings for one purpose only—to create profit for the people running that business, whether as an organised crime group or as a small local industry. That profit is reinvested in crime. It is not only for reasons of criminality that people are brought to this country. As other members have said, people are brought here to be entered into domestic servitude, to berry pick and perform other menial tasks on farms, to work in the fish or cockle industries, or to work in the fast-food industry or restaurants. Throughout Europe, those are recognised as parts of a major trail. People are exchanged between countries and bartered as though they were coupons, and we stand aside, almost powerless to intervene. I agree with everything that Christina McKelvie said about the UK Border Agency. It is too comfortable to find someone outside the country to blame. I applaud the cabinet secretary for all that he has done so far in combating organised crime. He mentioned his contacts with Eire, Northern Ireland and Wales, but there was one obvious omission. I encourage him to engage with the Home Secretary and to make personal contact with her—a task that I think he is yet to undertake. Such a link could persuade UK agencies to engage more productively with us in Scotland. Members have already spoken about the sex industry, so I do not intend to address it in any detail. The industry is UK-wide and young women are moved around the country on a regular basis according to demand—almost in the same way as hire cars. There is no doubt that the Olympics and the Commonwealth games will create a market of men who come to this country to look for those services. Members have also mentioned the exchange and sale of children across countries. Such cases are not often recognised as trafficking, but that is what they are. We should bear in mind that, at the time of Wilberforce, who has been mentioned, human beings probably did not recognise that having people as slaves was immoral and unjust. For that to be recognised, it took a man to stand on his feet and argue against that culture. In passing, I mention that evidence from elsewhere in the UK indicates that children in care homes are sometimes trafficked by men who identify them, subvert them and use their powerless situation to engage them in the sex trade. I support all that has been said about the need to name the crime and use the aggravation element; to create a database that would give us the services landscape; to co-ordinate all our agencies; to develop interpretation services to enable people to speak and communicate; and to have the minister lead on a strategic plan with adequate resources to train staff and to properly respond to the challenge that we face.

The cabinet secretary might remember that I wrote to her on 1 February expressing concerns about the lack of representation from East Ayrshire Council on the board of NHS Ayrshire and Arran, and I recorded that the council representative had been absent through disqualification since December last year. Does she agree that events at the board show the need for effective governance, and that East Ayrshire Council would do well to reconsider its current situation, whereby it has no representation on the board of that important body?

Areas of renewable energy, green options, waste processing and recycling have captured much of and promised more to the public’s imagination. Until now, the reality has been that, in the absence of substantial Government and public subsidy, making credible business cases for developments to meet those promises has been a challenge. In that context, the UK Government’s proposal to create a green investment bank is to be welcomed and the bid for the bank to be located in Edinburgh makes even more sense. The concept of a financial institution being created to deliver in one area of investment activity is not without precedent. As many members will know, the Agricultural Mortgage Corporation was formed in 1928, largely as a response to those in agricultural communities who found it virtually impossible to obtain financial support for their businesses. The Agricultural Mortgage Corporation, which is now maintained as part of Lloyds TSB Bank plc, was created with the declared aim of developing investment in farms and equestrian, rural and horticultural businesses. As an area of investment deemed to be alien by many bankers and investors, it was in need of experience and knowledge of the particular challenges and benefits that were attached to agricultural businesses and consequently the corporation worked with professionals in the field. The corporation now deals with almost 40 per cent of all the mid and long-term needs of that industry. In the realm of green investments, a similar level of specialism is required, based on the experience and knowledge necessary to enable appropriate business decisions to be made in areas of finance deemed as risky by those with insufficient expertise. The first priorities of the bank will be offshore wind farms, commercial and industrial waste processing and recycling, energy from waste generation, non-domestic energy efficiency, and support for the green deal. As the minister indicated, it is anticipated that up to 100 quality jobs will be created to manage the bank and its business deals. Those are jobs that Scotland sorely needs, given our current situation. Importantly, the presence of the bank as part of UK financial services will create the culture necessary to identify and pump-prime the new ideas that are necessary to allow Scotland to grow the technologies and processes to place us to the fore of commercial and competitive businesses. The committed budget of more than £3 billion sounds like big money but pales into insignificance in comparison with the forecast £200 billion required before 2020 to deliver on Britain’s requirements. Important, though, is the immediate availability of £100 million next financial year to invest in smaller waste infrastructure projects. Given the criteria laid out for the green investment bank, there is no doubt that Edinburgh, with its experience as a financial centre, will be able to recruit and train staff. That has already been commented on by many members. Equally, the proximity of Edinburgh to various supreme academic institutions and programmes could see the green investment bank situated close to the leading edge in research and development, as well as the global players in the green industries. Edinburgh’s bid demonstrates value for money that competes with any of the other 31 locations under consideration. In spite of comments from Mr Moore in the lead-up to a decision, my only fear about Edinburgh’s competitive advantage in the process is whether the on-going doubts that the SNP Government has created about separation from UK institutions will result in the UK deciding to maintain the green investment bank within the confines of those countries directly and definitely part of a future UK relationship. Ken Macintosh was right to invite the minister to comment on that in his closing speech to quell the worries outside this place. Whatever the impact of that element of concern, I fully support our efforts to persuade the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills of Edinburgh’s supreme suitability for the bank. I hope that Nathan Goode’s observation yesterday in the media that Scotland’s nuanced approach of being highly developed and competitive while ensuring collaborative responses wins the day.

In the light of the Government’s consultation, any fair-minded person would question the wisdom of a Government proposal that is partly justified by the view that there are too many public bodies and a measure that would get rid of 17 of them in one go. Prison visiting committees have more than 100 years of experience of visiting prisons and dealing with prisoners’ concerns. Staffed as they are by local, unpaid, independent-minded, concerned and motivated people, the committees are not Government-paid service providers who are mindful of the next contract round. The current proposals remind me of an earlier debate about the abolition of the police complaints commissioner—an option that was equally rushed but was, thankfully, later abandoned in the light of members’ concerns. People in our prisons, some of whom have been convicted and some of whom are innocent but are being held on remand, are in a particularly vulnerable position. Many are weak, poorly educated, mentally ill or confused because of language difficulties. All prisoners need to know that prison visiting committees exist not because it is a paid job and the visitors are beholden to the state, but because they are locally based, fair-minded and committed to ensuring an independent assessment of prisoners’ circumstances with a view to delivering—this is the important element—fair and decent treatment. I have no reservations about supporting SPS staff. Their efforts are there for us all to see. Long gone are the violent decades of prison disruptions. However, the high standards in our current system are in no small part due to the efforts of independent visiting committees that exist to safeguard proper treatment and humane standards. The Government’s proposals to abandon the work of those volunteers look mean spirited and short-sighted. The idea that some agency, or even the current committees, could tender and win the contracts and administer them more effectively by spending a small amount of money on training staff is perverse and without the support of evidence. The Government should invest in the current prison visiting committees so that they can reorganise and ensure that appropriate training standards are maintained. The history and commitment of prison visiting committees, acknowledged by the minister in his “cheerio” letter of 5 December, deserve better. Prison visiting committees merit our support. Without doubt, much is still to be done to improve prison policy and service, but the proposal seems to me to be tinkering at the margins. I support Annabel Goldie’s motion.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what assessment it has made of the impact on vulnerable groups, such as disabled students, of reductions to the further education budget. (S4O-00611)

Last year, colleges throughout Scotland reported a shortfall of almost £5.5 million on a budget of £95.6 million for student support. If the student support budget, which was already short last year, is about to be cut by £11 million this year, what impact does the cabinet secretary think that that will have on vulnerable students who rely on that support to study at college?

2. To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure that a single police service will have effective governance and be locally accountable. (S4O-00570)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the concerns that police and staff organisations have expressed about the costs that the new single police force will have to bear, which are estimated to include £25 million-plus in VAT and £80 million in redundancy costs? Can he offer any information to current employees that will give them comfort for the future?

Much has been said this morning about listening to civic Scotland. I have more than 200 letters in my office from communities throughout Scotland expressing disquiet about overconcentration of wind farms and related matters. Will the minister reconsider the situation and consider a moratorium on future developments?

I begin by responding to Christina McKelvie’s perception of negativity among Labour members. Most Labour members have acknowledged first and foremost the hard work of teachers throughout the sector in Scotland and of the pupils whom they teach, their parents and the support workers in schools, who are vital to the good work that schools do. As someone whose household is occupied by secondary school teachers, I am loth not to add my commendation to such comments. However, it is important that, when given the opportunity, members of the Opposition should bring to the attention of the cabinet secretary areas of concern and shortcomings that we identify.

I hear what the cabinet secretary says, but he must acknowledge that, in the few minutes in which an opportunity presents itself to members to make their views heard, there is sometimes enthusiasm to spread their knowledge and share it with him. There is no doubt that the curriculum for excellence has been haunted this year by financial cuts in the provision of post-16 opportunities in further education. Cuts are also intended for next year. Teacher numbers reduced by 3,657 between 2007 and 2011 and, in 2012, the numbers will reduce by a further 561. Although classroom numbers have been in decline, the reduction in the number of teachers has, proportionally, overtaken that decline. The Smith group began its work in the knowledge that official Government figures identified that 40 per cent of the lowest-attaining pupils came from the 10 per cent of communities that are the most deprived. The group acknowledged that the curriculum should personalise learning to meet individual aspirations and competencies; should provide mentoring from a trusted adult role model; and should apply appropriate support in the context of the young person’s life—for instance, by providing day care or transport facilities. It will be interesting to hear the extent to which the Government is delivering on those outcomes. Is the Government effectively targeting that 40 per cent group from the 10 per cent most deprived communities? Some of those communities are in the south of Scotland. An abundance of reports outline the costs to public services that arise as a result of failures—in unemployment, ill health and substance abuse, to name just a few. In effect, those failures emanate from a fall from the education system. The current policy of early intervention is therefore entirely right—not solely because of a moral responsibility to lift people out of poverty and deprivation but because it makes sense in terms of saving public funds. Cuts in public budgets—whether disguised by freezes in council tax or by budget allocations in a concordat—will in all cases impact on service provision in education. Much effort goes on disguising such figures and, thereafter, much effort from Opposition parties goes on trying to reveal them again. Little time is left in which to hold the Government to account for its decisions. In that context, real questions remain—as raised by the Smith group. Has the Scottish Government ensured that local authority funding for pre-school education is safeguarded in the coming years in real terms? Is the importance of pre-school education strengthened as part of the early years policy? In addition, has the Government taken steps to ensure that education authorities re-examine how the transition by young people from primary to secondary school is handled? In particular, it has to be identified why some young people become unsettled and disengaged by the move. If the minister’s response is positive to all those questions, why, for instance, have active schools budgets—funds designed to enable pupil participation in sport outwith the school day and often away from the school premises—been cut in many authorities? In at least one, it has been cut from £8 per pupil to £3 per pupil. Why is it impossible, in light of the forthcoming Olympic and Commonwealth games, to enhance the time that is allocated to physical education in secondary schools to the promised two hours a week? Why has the Government allowed a widening range of higher and further education bodies to offer courses leading to a career in physical education, given the downturn in available places for teachers in that sector? If education is to be relevant, it should fit the needs of its customers—the very young people who would seek physical education as well as other core subject opportunities. A sporting Scot offers balance to the academic life and a promise for a healthy future. I support the amendment in Hugh Henry’s name.

7. To ask the Scottish Executive whether the additional 1,000 police officers it has recruited have been assigned to front-line duties, in light of the 2 per cent increase in violent crime in the last year. (S4O-00535)

Reports indicate that a single police force will attract VAT charges in excess of £22 million per year. Given that the Scottish Police Services Authority recently spent more than £100,000 on expert advice to seek an alternative to VAT, without success, will the minister confirm what the VAT position is, and confirm that he has plans to hand to avoid a knock-on effect of job cuts and an adverse impact on services across Scotland?

First, I associate myself with the comments of David McLetchie about the responsibility of the clubs. I remind Christine Grahame that we raised the matter at an earlier stage of the bill, and that we on the Labour benches are focusing strongly on it. The SNP Government is to be congratulated on the support that has been mustered in relation to the bill. To unite Rangers and Celtic supporters, the Law Society of Scotland, the churches, the Scottish Human Rights Commission, academics, commentators and Liberty—to name but a few—in opposition against it is impressive, and they oppose it with good reason. Two thousand years ago, the Roman senator, Cicero, said: “The strictest law often causes the most serious wrong.” We should take heed of that message. The minister has had ample opportunity to provide the Justice Committee and Parliament with evidence to back up her call for new laws. Where are the statistics on sectarianism that have been asked for each year by the Roman Catholic Church? They are missing when they could have assisted us. Where was the evidence of the significant numbers of cases whose prosecutions failed due to problems with current laws? Where was the commitment to football banning orders in the five years during which fewer than 120 such orders were issued? In the past six months, however, the authorities have delivered 50 such bans. The evidence was not there. Instead we were given the opinions of three police officers, who said that they needed new powers, and of the Lord Advocate, who appeared to suggest in the press that Parliament should not even debate the bill, and that we should merely pass the matter to him to deal with. Cicero also commented that “the arrogance of officialdom should be tempered and controlled”. We have been given no facts and figures relating to failed cases, and no demonstration of what would change as a result of the new laws. We have been given opinions, not evidence. In most democratic societies, laws are enacted not as a result of the demands of the police or prosecutors, but because communities identify the need for solutions. So what is this new crime, and how will we recognise it? Therein lies a difficulty. The Minister has been unable to clarify the unchallenged circumstances with which this law is designed to deal. Indeed, when excerpts of football chants and songs were played for her on BBC radio, she rejected, with some haste, the invitation to “name that crime”, and insisted that a police officer would be best placed to decide on that question. Last night on television, Humza Yousaf also failed the test of clarifying the situation.

I am sorry; I will not. In the past four years, the average number of arrests at old firm games has been 11. That is still too many, but are we really creating new draconian legislation to deal with an acknowledged small minority among the 50,000 fans at a match? We are told that interpretations surrounding sections of the bill are to be resolved by guidelines that will not form part of the bill. The problem with unwritten law is that we do not know where to go to erase it. In evidence to the Justice Committee last week on a possible bill of rights, Lord McCluskey said: “Definition is fundamental to administering the law. Judges ought to be able to read the law like a railway timetable, not as a kind of general declaration of intent”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 6 December 2011; c 592.]

Will the law be accessible? Is it foreseeable to the man or woman in the street? The sectarianism legislation needs to be accessible and foreseeable, but how can it be if the minister describes it as a “catch-all” in some of his conclusions?

Will the Government take the opportunity to talk up Scotland and accept Labour’s fleshed-out plans in the interests of decent supporters everywhere?

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what criteria it uses to determine the allocation of funds for the sex offender treatment programme in prisons. (S4O-00451)

Does the minister agree that now would be a timely opportunity to conduct a review of the programme—and other training courses that are administered by the Scottish Prison Service—in terms of cost and benefit, with particular attention being paid to reoffending rates before and after participation in such courses?

At page 3 of his report, Lord Carloway states: “the system for which”— the state— “is responsible must respect, promote and protect human rights in an effective manner. As well as ensuring the proper treatment of those suspected of having committed a crime, it must protect the rights of all those affected or potentially affected by crime.” In the context of that statement, I welcome the 78 recommendations in the report and look forward to the responses that we receive and the debate that we will have in the Justice Committee to decide the way forward. As has been referred to already, the history of the requirement for corroboration goes back so far that it is difficult to remember why and how it all began. During his evidence to the Justice Committee, Lord Carloway indicated that it was largely born from the desire to protect accused persons appearing before the courts in Scotland, where there was a presumption among some juries of the guilty nature of the accused not because of the evidence but because of their name. The requirement for corroboration was a mechanism by which the system could provide some measure of protection to an accused. It allowed the weighing of evidence before it was considered by a jury so that the court could ensure that a jury based its decision on guilt or innocence rather than on someone’s surname. Thankfully, we have moved a long way since those days. In the hundreds of years that have passed since, many nations throughout Europe and elsewhere in the world have stepped back from corroboration. Scotland alone depends on it to provide support in the courts on decisions of guilt and innocence. In a modern-day environment, we have tape recording of interviews, closed-circuit television in police offices, continuing scrutiny from the press, the provision of legal aid and extremely professional solicitors available to accused and suspects. Those things provide public oversight of our system. Importantly, there has been a change in the relationship between the individual citizen and the forces of the establishment. In that context, it is appropriate that we should analyse whether there is a continued requirement for corroboration.

Yes, I think that that is correct. It is a consideration that needs to be solemnly gauged in our discussions in the weeks and months ahead. We should also bear in mind that, although the recommendation is to abolish the requirement for corroboration, it is not to ban corroboration. There is still an opportunity, where witnesses are available and a prosecutor sees the need, to use corroborative evidence in the court process. As the cabinet secretary said earlier, corroboration also affects the administrative background of the various services that are required. Two people are required to deal with administrative matters such as the collection of evidence, the signing of productions and the obtaining of statements, where often one would suffice and would still meet the needs of the court. Corroboration is a subject that deserves careful analysis. Lord Carloway argued persuasively to the committee for an approach that looks at the quality of the evidence provided by witnesses. It is an argument that we need to take seriously. Police detention and questioning are always a contentious issue—it is the one time when the citizen comes into conflict with the state in an area in which it is all too easy to misunderstand and misrepresent. In days of yore, common law oversaw that relationship and it was very much left to the courts to judge the fairness or otherwise of police interviews. With the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980, that changed and the police were authorised to bring suspects to a police office under the oversight of the provisions of that act. As we have heard, the ECHR has set a separate context, Salduz has applied a new standard and the Cadder judgment has moved us forward. I welcome the recommendations on police detention because they will help to bring clarity to the issue and create a balance between the subject’s rights and the state’s responsibilities. The right to liberty in article 5 of the ECHR and the right to a fair trial in article 6 are rights that we would all seek to access at a time of need. It is correct that we should offer those rights to our citizens. The general power to arrest on reasonable suspicion, as recommended in the report, is to be welcomed, as is the 12-hour balance for how long the power of arrest should sustain. A letter of rights is common sense, but we need to take time to work through and understand access to solicitors and investigative bail. Lord Carloway said in his report that he sought “to re-establish Scotland at the forefront of the law and practice of human rights in general.” I welcome that statement and I look forward to the months ahead, when we can try to get that right for the future.

Members will know that I have worked behind the scenes to ensure that Neil Findlay’s motion was lodged for discussion today, and I am heartily pleased at the number of members who have turned up to engage in the debate. It will be hard, in four minutes, to pull together all that I have learned in the past six months about the issue. Suffice it to say that, in coming to the Parliament, I took a neutral view on the pros and cons of renewable energy, and of wind farms in particular. I have come to learn, however, from the communities across South Scotland about many of the issues that disturb them. I have also learned of their feeling that they are just not being listened to, and that the Parliament and politicians in general do not want to hear what they have to say. It speaks volumes that so many people have made the effort to come to the chamber at 5 o’clock in the evening, given the challenges of the traffic and the road conditions at this time of year. That should illustrate that they are here not solely for themselves but for the thousands of people across the various constituencies in Scotland for whom this is not an imagined problem. I am somewhat concerned that a document that has been published by Scottish Renewables—which I understand to be a private company, or at least a pressure group—has been tendered at the back of our chamber alongside official documents. It gives me a lead-in to some comments that I want to make, however, and the Presiding Officer can be sure that I will write to her later to check whether it is appropriate that such documents be laid in our chamber. The document states: “Wind works”. The evidence that has been given to me from the community is that wind works to a certain extent. The claimed efficiency of 30 per cent can sometimes fall to below 20 per cent, and most people in the chamber will have had experience of it not working at all. However, the public purse still pays, via the consumer. The document also states: “Wind is not expensive”. As Adam Ingram said, however, all energy has to be paid for, and according to The Office of Gas and Electricity Markets, wind power is subsidised at a rate of £100 or more per consumer. The document also states: “Wind cuts CO2 emissions”. So do other renewables opportunities, however. It goes on: “Wind farms do not harm tourism or property prices”. Adam Ingram has already given an account of their impact in South Scotland, and evidence across the United Kingdom indicates that they have an impact elsewhere. The document goes on to state: “Wind is a major contributor to the economy”. It might well be a contributor in the short term, during the building of the farms, but thereafter, the jobs and economy that will survive on the back of that will largely be overseas, not within Scotland’s boundaries. The document also states: “The environmental impacts of onshore wind are limited and managed”. The planning arrangements across Scotland are, as has been described by others, chaotic. Wind farms end up being placed where the entrepreneurs in that Klondike environment think the most profits can be achieved—not where they best serve the public or support our communities and environment. Finally, the document states: “Wind farms are not noisy”. I visited a part of South Scotland and listened to the wind farms. They are noisy and they create an environment in which people who live near them can be affected by illness. We have health and environmental impacts—

We also have problems with noise and flicker. We are at the first stage of the opening up of this debate and I look forward to the minister giving serious consideration to the current situation. [Applause.]

In the light of publicity in the press today about Barlinnie prison, can the cabinet secretary share with us any plans that he has for Barlinnie and any timescales that apply? Will he also note the heartfelt support that I offer to the staff at Barlinnie, who carry out their duties very impressively for us?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what it is doing to tackle climate change. (S4O-00385)

The First Minister and others have long heralded the impact of the climate challenge fund in reducing carbon emissions by 700,000 tonnes, but in response to a freedom of information request the Scottish Government confirmed solely that community groups have reduced their CO2 emissions by 125,866 tonnes. Although those communities are to be congratulated on their reductions, has the balance of 570,000 tonnes been delivered and, if so, how was it done?

Presiding Officer, thank you for allowing me to contribute to the debate. As a South Scotland list member, I acknowledge the contribution to the debate of my colleague across the chamber, Aileen McLeod, and I support much of what she said in her speech. I thank her for acknowledging that all of us in the chamber are committed to regeneration and that it is in all our interests that Scotland should be regenerated and our communities given every opportunity to be all that they can be. At the same time, I ask Sandra White to accept that Michael McMahon’s amendment to the motion is not necessarily negative, as she would see it. It is the duty of the Opposition to point out what we see as shortcomings in the way forward that the cabinet secretary has presented. Creating new life from what was there before is the key to regeneration. It is about revitalising communities and giving people in them the opportunity to be part of 21st century Scotland. This debate should be about delivering life back to the communities that need it most. I was pleased that the cabinet secretary said that in his speech. Regeneration is not an easy topic. Certainly, in all my working life, regeneration has been a fact of Government policy and a focus of local authority effort. My first involvement in this area was with a regeneration initiative from Strathclyde region. At that time in the 1970s, it was called generating change. I have no doubt that politicians of that generation were like-minded in their commitment to do their best for the people whom they served. However, it is not as easy as just adding up the numbers and putting together initiatives. In my experience of regeneration, there are four key elements. The first key element is our people, but there are difficulties that need to be faced full on and delivered on. Currently, homelessness figures are up by 25 per cent, with 36,440 households identified as homeless in our communities. Although that is a tragedy for those families, it also offers the opportunity of regeneration. We have affordable homes to build to give those families the opportunity to participate and be part of what we would see as a regeneration process. As was said earlier, unemployment is up to 8 per cent. One in five young people are unemployed. One in four young men are unemployed. The regeneration of areas such as Ayr, Kilmarnock, Stranraer and rural communities is important. We need to learn the lessons that were delivered at Dalmarnock and Ravenscraig. The old idiom suggests that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Preventative spending seems to have won out, and there is a consensus. Job creation, particularly for young people, can support the regeneration of areas and increase economic activity and it is good for the economy. It will also limit the decline of an area, minimising the need for drastic regeneration again in the future. Therefore, in the current financial climate, with 215,000 unemployed and a need for more skills in our workforce, there is clear evidence of the negative and pervasive effect of significant youth unemployment. Our Government needs to have a strategy for job creation.

That is a good point. The problem is that the latest figures for apprenticeships for 2010-11 reveal that 12,827 apprenticeship starts are currently at college and the information from building firms that I deal with in the south of Scotland—and from the Confederation of British Industry—indicates that the likelihood of delivering on those 25,000 places is pie in the sky. There is a challenge for the Government to deliver on its target and to be seen to be doing so. If it is delivered, I will applaud that fact, but there is a question mark that needs to be faced, and it is a question mark that young people worry about daily. I am sure that there is no member in this chamber who has not had young people approach them and share their worries about their future and their families’ futures. Last month, while speaking of the impact of the budget constraints, the principal of Borders College told the Education and Culture Committee: “We will have to reduce places, lose staff and turn away even more students than we already turn away.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 4 October 2011; c 265.] That is an uncomfortable statement, and it is not one that anyone in this chamber wants to hear. However, as an Opposition, we need the Government to answer that point, and to do so with confidence and with facts. The second key issue in regeneration is capital. Entrepreneurs, banks, local authorities and the Scottish Government must work together to release investment. UK cuts are regularly referred to in this chamber, but we need to accept that we are talking about world cuts. The priorities for the Scottish budget are set by ministers in this Parliament, and they need to be answerable for where they decide to invest the funds.

The first thing that we should do is to ensure that we use to best effect all the powers that we already have and demonstrate the efficiency of our policies. Another element in terms of delivery is ideas—the vision, the ambition, the leadership by the Government and the ownership of the problems that lie behind the current situation. The final element concerns land and projects. The Government must find the means to reduce the time lag in delivering projects, developing projects and ensuring that people can enjoy the projects that we plan. I offer the Gartcosh project as an example. It is nearly 10 years old and is still to be occupied, not only as a facility for public use but, more important, as a development opportunity for North Lanarkshire. I encourage the Government to look to similar projects in the south of Scotland and to give rural communities the opportunity to be part of 21st century Scotland.

I am obliged, Presiding Officer. I am complete.

I agree with the minister that action is necessary and that we need to decide the way forward. I am the only MSP with five years of direct experience as a match commander with Strathclyde Police. As a young policeman, I was on duty at Ibrox on the day of the disaster, and I later learned the lessons from the Bradford, Heysel and Hillsborough disasters. With many others in the service, I put together the procedures that are now used to manage and police football events. As a result, football matches and their surrounds are not seen primarily as opportunities to exercise law enforcement; rather, they are firmly events at which public safety is focused on for tens of thousands of decent people who seek to enjoy the sporting event. That is not surprising. The onerous responsibilities that are placed on match commanders, their staff and club stewards are faced on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Saturdays, Sundays and even Mondays now throughout the season. We should be extremely careful to ensure that we do not unwittingly destroy the good work that has been done over the past 20 years.

Of course I accept that, and I hope to address that matter. The head of security at Rangers Football Club, David Martin, reminded the Justice Committee that it is recognised throughout Europe that Scottish football demonstrates best practice in safety and crowd conduct, to the extent that UEFA uses Scottish officials to spread the good word elsewhere. We know that the way in which the police and stewards interact with vast crowds can have a direct impact on outcomes. Against that background, I demur from supporting the introduction of new legislation. I abhor sectarianism and, indeed, any form of hatred, but there is an absence of clarity about what we are trying to do with the new law. Roseanna Cunningham’s evidence to the committee and her media responses, including in a transmitted interview that she gave when she was in opposition in which she apparently questioned the wisdom of such laws, further confused me. In the committee, the police and later the Lord Advocate, who often quoted police evidence, said that new law was needed, but where is the evidence on the current deficiencies? No statistics were provided regarding failed charges and cases or how many offenders had escaped justice. What precisely is the point of the bill? The first announcements said that it was about sectarianism—bold and stark—and that the proposal was alleged to be supported by a chief constable, the old firm clubs and others. However, at committee we heard from club representatives that the first they knew of the proposals was from the newspapers. In addition, we now see Stephen House distancing himself somewhat, because he reported to his police authority last month that his original intentions in seeking a meeting with ministers were around the violence associated with old firm matches. In fairness, he added that his force was supportive of Government attempts to deal with bigotry and hate crimes, although any new legislation would still leave his officers dealing with violent attacks and domestic violence.

Of course I accept that. It is also clear that in the interim period, as we awaited the arrival of the new laws, offenders were successfully prosecuted throughout the summer for sectarian offences. What is the way forward and what is the action plan? We should hold progress on the bill for 12 months to give the football authorities, under the auspices of the joint action group, the responsibility for bringing good conduct to their clubs; to gather statistics and analyse the scale and nature of the problem and the responses, particularly football banning orders, which have been underused up to now; and to ensure that the sports authorities deal with sectarian behaviour by withdrawing season tickets, closing turnstiles for matches or, as in Turkey last month, having only women and children spectators, or by imposing fines and, what is worst of all, the deduction of points. Football pundits at committee described the SFA response as cowardly. That response has to change. Members will know that some clubs—led by Aberdeen Football Club—are already in the era of games being played with no police presence, which is the future. We should ensure that the money raised from fines is given to third-sector groups such as Nil by Mouth, to support initiatives such as Glasgow City Council’s sense over sectarianism and to monitor on-going progress and cause a report to come back to Parliament that assesses progress and options at the end of the season. Members should know that prisoners in our prisons from across the so-called divide live and watch old firm games together without sectarian problems. Why?

It is not because of the threat of arrest—they are already in jail—but because of the knowledge that the authorities will withdraw the privilege of seeing the match and that that will impact on other prisoners. If it works in prison, why should it—

Will the member give way?

I have repeatedly said in the Justice Committee that there is not a police officer in the land who does not call for more powers or want to have more legislation. I gave an outline of an action plan, so while we may not have come up with any amendments to the legislation we have certainly come up with suggestions. We hope that the Government will consider them in the positive spirit in which we have offered them.

I concur with all that Fiona McLeod said in her speech about the good advice that should be offered to people who live in our constituencies. With its predominance of retired and elderly people, the south of Scotland is obviously a target area for rogue traders. There are three levels to such trading. First, the no-tax economy—the avoidance of VAT and income tax—is theft from us all. It steals jobs and apprenticeships from the wider building community, and it gives no benefit, even in times of hardship, when the attraction of a so-called cheap job must be a lure to many people. All our experience should say that the likelihood of a good job being done in such circumstances is about the same as the likelihood of the tax being paid. We should learn from that experience. The second element is substandard work and those traders who are untrained and unsupported but who continue to purport that they can deliver work to householders. There is a deal of work to be done in identifying those rogue traders and in using the data and intelligence that is held by local authorities, trade organisations and the police to respond to the threat that they pose to householders who trust them to work on their roofs, chimneys, electrics, plumbing and so on. Too often they leave behind the kind of disaster that we see on television. The final group comprises the criminal element. They have no intention of paying taxes, doing any work or providing a service to a householder. In truth, that can affect any generation, but it has properly been identified tonight that the elderly are a particular target. I will add to some of the suggestions that have been offered tonight. It is vital that the elderly and retired understand that it is always dangerous to indicate the presence of sums of cash in their house with which they can pay for work. When work is offered, they should delay and ask either a relative or neighbour to come round and be part of the negotiation. That is always a good first step before deciding if work should be taken on. I commend the work of the trading standards departments that was mentioned earlier. Even in these difficult times, I hope that local authorities can support their work. Those departments need to be able to link together in acknowledging who the rogue workers and substandard contractors are so that we can respond to them positively. We need to encourage the exchange of data between the police and trading standards departments in areas in which we suspect criminality. Finally, I invite trade organisations to play their part and feed into the intelligence that is used by public authorities to stem the tide of this vile trade. I commend James Kelly for bringing the issue to Parliament’s attention so that we can advise people how best to defend themselves.

It is with trepidation and some humility that I speak in this debate. Trepidation because the subject matter is very important to us all—it is heartening to hear that we all agree on many of the main ingredients that we have discussed thus far—and humility because I bow to the greater knowledge and experience of many who are here in the chamber, particularly Richard Lyle and Gil Paterson. My first insight into these matters came in a previous life, when I was a board member of a residential home, which gave me a privileged opportunity to see some of the difficulties that were faced by the young people concerned and the carers who looked after them so diligently. On entering that environment as a member of the public, my first shock was to discover that many of the young people in that residential setting were there not because of any failing or criminality on their part, but because of failings in their family environment and social circumstances that they were unfortunate enough to bear. It is against that backdrop that I lean on a quotation from someone who was once a looked-after child and who went on to become an extremely successful dress designer and a vice-president of Barnardo’s—Bruce Oldfield. He said: “If we want ... children to find happiness and security, we must be as flexible and free-thinking as possible. We must remove any obstacle from placing a child safely and within the shortest space of time.” The reference to safety takes on board Gil Paterson’s apt comment. Bruce Oldfield went on to say: “It is surely a matter of common sense and pragmatism; where there is a long-term haven for a child, let’s grab it with both hands.” For those reasons, I welcome Angela Constance’s motion, which seeks to improve the life chances of looked-after children, and I hope that the Government will pay due respect to Claire Baker’s amendment, which seeks to attach timescales to the achievement of actions. If the minister ruffles a few feathers, she can be sure that she will have my support in that regard. As we have heard, approximately 1,600 children and young people are in residential care. Audit Scotland reported recently that although £250 million is spent annually on services and support for them, not all of them are receiving the best quality of care, and that local authorities cannot demonstrate that they are achieving value for money. In itself, that is not a criticism of the hard work of the people who are involved in a difficult environment, but it tells us that we need to find a degree of flexibility and imagination in solving the problems that we face. Of the 9,000 children in Scotland who are looked after away from home, 50 per cent are placed with foster parents and 28 per cent are looked after by friends or relatives. Around 200 of them are adopted each year. My experience in residential homes indicated that many of the children—the majority of them—had been badly damaged by their experiences and were extremely vulnerable. What they sought, quite openly, was safety, security, and love and attention. As has been mentioned, the average length of time that children spend in our care system is increasing. That has a serious effect on educational attainment, which Stewart Maxwell eloquently described. In comparison with the general population, prisoners are 13 times more likely to have been in care as children; 27 per cent of the prison population and half of all prisoners under 25 were in care at one time. Bureaucracy can be a considerable barrier to finding a child a home or getting them into a permanent home more quickly, so the Government’s commitment to promoting the use of foster carers as adopters or permanent long-term carers is to be welcomed.

It seems to me, as someone who does not have a depth of experience in such matters, that what the member says is common sense. Delivering services for children and young people in such cases should be tailored to the needs of the young person. Services should be designed to ensure that the young person is given the support, the environment and the love that are required for them to develop, and they should be delivered in a supportive manner. For the majority of children in our care, it took more than two years after their first involvement with services before they achieved a degree of permanence through an adoption of parental responsibility order. The shortest period of time was 12 and a half months and the longest was 10 years and 10 months. For a young person, 12 and a half months is a lifetime. We need to find a way of circumventing the difficulties we face, which we are trying to address. I ask Parliament to support the motion and the amendment from Claire Baker.

I thank Lord McCluskey’s group for the effort that it has made and the quality of the report that it has produced in such quick time and in unfortunate circumstances. I trust that the Government will encourage consultations on many of the recommendations that have been discussed in the chamber today and which still cause some concerns. The cabinet secretary’s motion refers twice to the “integrity” of Scots law and comments on the “historical independence” of Scots law. It is therefore a pity that neither the First Minister nor the Cabinet Secretary for Justice considered those issues before uttering their inflammatory comments in respect of the procedures around the Supreme Court. We should have been spending our time in this chamber discussing other issues affecting Scottish communities: jobs, unemployment, health, education or the economy. The notion of an entirely independent Scottish legal system in this complex world might be a comfort to some practitioners of law, but the public merely want an effective system that delivers justice. Why are we discussing the Supreme Court today? It is largely due to the First Minister’s senseless outburst about the Supreme Court.

The point I am making, which the member makes well for me, is that the rhetoric got in the way of the substance and deflected our attention from the key underlying issues. The First Minister’s outburst about Supreme Court judges was followed by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice’s observations about those justices’ knowledge. Let us remember that Lord Hope and his unfortunately now deceased colleague Lord Rodger were both acknowledged experts in jurisprudence. So, why the discord? Both judges were, unfortunately, members of a court that was not based in Lamlash but located in London. What we have here is a manufactured stushie born of the devolution settlement of 1998. The Scotland Act 1998 enabled the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London to act as an arbiter on human rights issues, although at the time Alex Salmond MP described the organisation as consisting of many members who had held political office and owed their appointment to the council to politics. It has been six years since the Constitutional Reform Act 2005, which ensured that those responsibilities were passed on to the Supreme Court. Only now, 13 years after the original legislation, have we had the outburst. The Cadder case quite properly resolved issues around a person’s right to have access to a solicitor when interviewed by the police. The Supreme Court decision confirmed Scotland’s respect for fairness and justice, but the Fraser ruling on whether it was fair that crucial evidence was withheld from the defence by the Crown seemed to cause the Government immediate concerns. If I was more cynical, I might have suspected that the Scottish Government was merely manufacturing its ire over such issues, but of course nothing so puerile could be at work here. Today’s motion shows that ministers were primarily concerned about the integrity of Scots law and its historical independence, which was perhaps better described by the justice secretary as the principle of who pays the piper calls the tune. That is not very edifying, but such an approach flags up warning signs about the dangers of political interference in enforcement and justice matters.

The cabinet secretary will remember that Lord McCluskey reported in those terms because the cabinet secretary asked him to report. The reason why he asked him to report is that such a furore was created in the lead-up to our discussions, in which we are engaged today. We must remember that there are real political dangers in interfering in enforcement and justice matters, particularly given the future formation of a single police force. I hope that Mr MacAskill will not seek to call the tune there, too. Throughout this heated argument, one office has maintained a consistent silence: that of the Lord Advocate. Not a syllable, word, sentence or paragraph has left his lips on this constitutional crisis, and some would say rightly so. It is a pity, however, that he did not maintain a similar dignified silence when it came to the political shenanigans surrounding the matter of sectarianism and football supporters. One would have hoped that he would be better suited to contribute to this debate than to one on football issues, but needs must.

Certainly, I am aware that the letter was written on 26 October. The member might remember that we have had some months of debate about this important issue and many comments from people who are less able—[Interruption.] We received the letter this morning and it has not been part of the public debate or the debate in the chamber. This stushie should have been resolved quietly and with some decorum, using a small, specialist team in committee to examine and report, not unlike—

Indeed. It should have been not unlike the McCluskey report, which we have already welcomed here. Not one South Scotland constituent has expressed to me any interest in the First Minister’s concern about the Supreme Court, because they are too busy struggling with other matters of import. Significantly, the Supreme Court will be maintained as a welcome opportunity for Scottish justice to see itself as others see it through appropriate decision making in areas of the European convention on human rights.

I am grateful to you, Presiding Officer—thanks very much.

10. To ask the Scottish Executive when the dental facility at East Ayrshire community hospital will be built. (S4O-00257)

As the cabinet secretary will know, it is estimated that more than £1 million has been spent on preparing the dental facility at East Ayrshire community hospital and rectifying the hospital now that that facility has been abandoned. Has the cabinet secretary a role to play in examining the lessons from this experience and will she share them with Parliament?

2. To ask the Scottish Executive how it will ensure a balanced response to wind farm applications. (S4O-00185)

Does the minister acknowledge that there are concerns in communities about wind farm developments? Will she conduct a review of the current subsidies that are provided to developers but paid for by Scottish households in order that an effective approach to fuel poverty might be identified for the 750,000 households that are adversely affected by the escalating costs of electricity?

Will the cabinet secretary give assurances that any savings that are achieved will not be made by reducing the terms and working conditions of police support staff?

Recovered criminal assets were previously identified for return to communities that were badly affected by crime. In recent years, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice has followed the England and Wales example and utilised around £5 million of the funds to pay for prosecutor and police work. We are now told that—

I am coming to it. That money has financed specialist sports interests. Can we go back to the original system, so that the liberated assets will be returned for the benefit of community groups in hard-pressed areas in which needs are dire?

I welcome the announcement about the single police force and the cabinet secretary’s statement. I am sure that it was a difficult decision for him. Although he is committed—

Although the cabinet secretary is committed to police staff, a number of support staff and firefighters will now have concerns. Will he be able to give them similar support?

I acknowledge the contribution of Lord Rodger of Earlsferry to the wellbeing of Scottish justice. I also acknowledge his humanity and the way in which he dealt with members of the public in the performance of his duties. This is one of the last debates before the summer recess, and I would have imagined that we would be dealing with an issue of great concern to the ordinary members of the public of Scotland. I thought that it might have been about the 200,000 Scottish children who are living in homes that have been designated cold and damp and who are suffering from fuel poverty, or about the 20,000 children who reside in homes with adults who are affected by drug abuse. No. We find that we are dealing with the role of the Supreme Court, a subject so significant to our future that the First Minister, in his interview with Holyrood magazine, focused his wrath on the institution in terms that one could only describe as unprecedented and unparliamentary. The attack on Lord Hope of Craighead, who is an acknowledged leading light in Scottish jurisprudence, was astonishing in its venom, and indeed in its inaccuracy. Taken in concert with the justice minister’s assertion that “He who pays the piper ... calls the tune”, it presented Scotland’s Government in an undignified light, creating an atmosphere for debate more akin to that of the football terraces than that of political discourse. The First Minister’s attack on “the vilest people on the planet” does nothing more than play to gut prejudice. He well knows that prisoners are in our prisons not because of who they are but because of what they have done. One can only imagine that the immediate thrill of its success in the election caused the Scottish National Party Government to lose the place—although hopefully it did so only momentarily. At least the First Minister has since recognised common sense by delaying his sectarianism legislation. Perhaps he now realises the error of his ways in his management of this issue, too, and perhaps the cabinet secretary will follow his example. Is the function of the Supreme Court of such import that it required the First Minister’s immediate attention? Apparently not. The genesis of the current situation emanates from the Scotland Act 1998 and the Human Rights Act 1998. The First Minister, who was then a member of the Westminster Parliament, presumably recognised the significance of section 57(2) of the Scotland Act 1998, given that it introduced a role for the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in reviewing the acts of the Lord Advocate. At the time, Mr Salmond harshly described the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council as consisting of many members who had held political office and owed their appointment to the council to politics. It has been 13 years since the Scotland Act 1998 and six years since the creation of a non-political Supreme Court, yet only now is the Scottish Government overcome by the absolute imperative of ensuring that Scottish courts are maintained in the fiction that they exercise their function in total isolation and that external courts should have no influence on the Scots law tradition. Depending on which part of his speech one listens to, the justice secretary’s position is either that the Supreme Court deals with routine cases or that it deals with fundamentally significant cases. It is curious that at this time we should find our attentions diverted from the real issues that are important to normal people.

I obviously recognise that the decisions taken by the Supreme Court are of fundamental import to Scots law, but the issues arising from the Cadder decision were flagged up earlier by a decision in relation to a Turkish case. That should have been acknowledged and acted on much earlier. The reality is that when the United Kingdom signed up to the Human Rights Act 1998, each jurisdiction in the UK became subject to responsibilities in relation to the Strasbourg court and the European convention on human rights. It seems to me that instead of denouncing a London-based court, which had two pre-eminent Scottish judges on it, Lord Hope and Lord Rodger, the Government would have done better to examine the ends at which the arrangement was aimed—swifter and better justice—and not become overwhelmed by the means by which the court’s decisions were arrived at. The Government’s concentration on both the court’s location and the nationality of the judges who are involved reduced Scotland’s position to one akin to hillbilly politics—and not for the first time. The substantive issue of having proper procedures while acknowledging the Supreme Court’s right to rule on appropriate Scottish matters was lost in the brouhaha. Common sense and decorum were abandoned as insults were flung and aspersions were cast. The McCluskey report offers a sane interim before the next stage: proper measured discussions involving experts who can advise best on the way to arrive at an appropriate solution to the current administrative lacuna. Be in no doubt: the independent report by McCluskey states that the Scottish Parliament has no power to alter the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in human rights matters. The report states—with the expert group’s agreement—that the Supreme Court should continue to have jurisdiction over human rights issues in Scottish criminal cases. For me, the key issue is to get the Government’s agreement on a way forward that acknowledges the Supreme Court as a valuable mechanism for deciding human rights matters affecting Scottish courts. Only then is it likely that, as the Cabinet Secretary for Justice suggested, a line can be drawn under this matter.

The Government has diverted our attention away from the real issues and, as such, I support Johann Lamont’s amendment.

I thank the Presiding Officer for giving me the chance to speak in the debate, and I thank Margaret Mitchell for raising an important issue. These are turbulent times for the police service, given the proposal for reform in the coming years. I acknowledge at the outset that I was heartened by the minister’s comments to the Justice Committee yesterday, which seemed to indicate openness on the way forward, but because this debate had been secured I felt that it was important to give some insight into my views on the matter. Although there is a great deal of police reform in the offing and no matter how it might play out, it will be a case of business as usual for the police service in the coming years, so it is important that the public have confidence in the systems that are utilised in investigating complaints, regardless of the nature of those complaints and the outcome that is achieved. There is no doubt that the commissioner has achieved a high level of confidence in his handling of complaints over the past four years. An important part of that has been investment in the quality of service in responding to complaints and, more important, in preventing complaints in the first place. Expertise has been built up in the 16 or so members of staff who work for the PCCS in Hamilton. It must be extremely difficult for them to continue their commitment to the important work that the PCCS does when such a cloud of uncertainty hangs over them. That expertise and commitment need to be invested in. There are worries that if we move forward with new structures, the public will think that those new structures will enable the police service to change inherently and generically, but that will not be the case. The amount of work that the PCCS does has increased substantially in recent years as people, quite properly, have accessed its services to rehearse any misgivings or reservations about the service that they have received. I suggest to the cabinet secretary that, in any future new set-up for the police service, it will be important that a police complaints commissioner of sorts can link with Her Majesty’s chief inspector of constabulary in assisting with the oversight and proper accountability of the police service through a national policing board. For that reason, I ask the cabinet secretary to maintain the current situation in the meantime, so that a clearer view can be taken of the nature of the police service in the years ahead and so that we can design the police complaints management system better to attune it to the needs of the police service as regards improvement and, more important, to ensure that it can deliver on the need of the Scottish public to have the confidence of knowing that their complaints have been treated seriously and been properly responded to. I see that I am still within my time, but I have said what I came here to say. I associate myself with all that Margaret Mitchell said in her speech.

I acknowledge the convener of the Justice Committee’s even-handed account of the work done by the committee in the past couple of days. She is quite right—and the minister knows—that although this is a short bill, as today’s debate has demonstrated, big issues lie behind the words on the paper. Legislation worthy of enforcement demands proper public scrutiny and a review by members of this Parliament in order that we can give knowing consent and authority to the law. The minister relies on the authorities to support her position, although I have seldom heard those in authority decline what appear to be additional powers. In the context of anti-sectarian legislation, the Justice Committee, on behalf of Parliament, has spent two short meetings taking evidence, debating complex issues and reviewing proposals deemed a priority by Government. The process has been sobering. It has demonstrated starkly the frustrations faced by members of the public, and others already referred to, in trying to feed into our considerations. As witnesses representing interests as diverse as the Church of Scotland, the Equality Network and national football authorities and clubs indicated, there has been little or, in the case of the clubs, no attempt to consult on the proposals. One witness noted that such a course of action was unheard of. There is a view that failure to give the general public the opportunity properly to consider the bill over a reasonable period means that the community might have no sense of ownership of the bill or confidence that it can deliver its stated aims. That is crucial when we consider that we pride ourselves on supporting the principle of policing by consent. If, as has been suggested during the past two days, elements of the proposals alienate or criminalise a section of our community unnecessarily because the legislation was poorly prepared, we will regret the unseemly haste that has been demonstrated. Members have identified the weaknesses in the bill. It is striking that only the Government and the people who will be tasked with enforcing the legislation on the Government’s behalf have spoken enthusiastically in support of the bill, without acknowledging the criticisms. Academics Dr Sarah Christie and Dr David McArdle left us in no doubt that more effective enforcement of the current legislation would be a more appropriate response, and their view was reinforced by the Law Society of Scotland. Fewer than 130 football banning orders are current, after four years of prosecutions. In my opinion, that indicates a lack of universal commitment in respect of our current difficulties. Indeed, one of our witnesses opined that elements of our judiciary “see banning orders as a regime that was developed down south to deal with a peculiarly English problem. One of the sheriffs said, ‘It is an English act with a kilt on it.’ It is of limited utility in Scotland”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 21 June 2011; c 61.] I think not. Our witnesses gave of their time and energy to offer their views at very short notice. Many more individuals, by means of e-mail and written submissions, reported grave concern that a police officer would be required in the heat of action to establish the difference between an offence under the bill and a joke, proselytising, free speech or satire—and would likely have to do so in the glare of the media and crowd attention. That is a tall order for anyone. As a result of those concerns, two Christian organisations are going to court to attempt to prevent the progress of the bill. Our witnesses from football clubs said that although they had attended a highly publicised summit the announcement of the bill had come as a surprise. They were briefed on the proposal only immediately before the Justice Committee’s meeting—a week before the bill is due to become law. A Government that displays cavalier disregard for basic principles creates danger. We need wisdom and prudence, not tough talk and grandstanding. The vast majority of football supporters deserve to be treated with respect. Sections 1 to 4 will not produce a suitable or proportionate response to the problems of sectarianism.

I invite the minister to display her skills in openness, accessibility and listening and to go away and think seriously about the reservations that have been expressed. The Scottish Police Federation said: “the financial memorandum is way off the mark”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 21 June 2011; c 38.] Given the reduction in policing and the use of stewards in our football grounds in the interests of cutting costs, I hope that we will think again.

I acknowledge Christine Grahame’s contribution and associate myself with much of what she said in relation to the Justice Committee. Last month, the First Minister introduced to the Parliament his vision for the next five years, which is underpinned, as he said, by a social wage. Although he stopped short of fully explaining his concept, many have linked the social wage to the 16th century philosophy of the social contract. The Parliament should be reminded that a key tenet behind such a philosophy is that concluding a social contract between the state and its citizens relies on the proper enforcement of laws by the state. The enforcement of laws provides protection and freedom for all, including the weak and poor in our communities, enabling them to contribute to our society. However, legislation that is worthy of enforcement requires proper review and scrutiny by members of the Parliament so that we give knowing consent and an authority to the laws that are to be enforced. In the context of the Government’s anti-sectarianism proposals, the Justice Committee has yet to be circulated with the information on behalf of the Parliament. We therefore have few, if any, days available to debate and review Government proposals on an issue that the Government deems to be a priority. Press reports have indicated that the yet-to-be-seen proposals will be made law by the end of the month, thereby creating an anticipation in the minds of the public. The Government is displaying a cavalier disregard for the very principles that underpin the First Minister’s vision for Scotland for the next five years. That does not demonstrate the inclusive approach that has been promised for this new session of our Parliament. If the Scottish Parliament is to mature into its rightful position in our constitutional arrangements, its members must be provided with time and due respect from Government ministers to play their individual parts in the creation of Scotland’s future. I make a non-partisan point here and reflect the intentions of our forebears in providing in this Parliament an institution to call Scotland’s Government to account properly. Governments typically find that process an interference and inconvenience, but a true democracy values not only a Government with vision but a strong Parliament that provides accountability. I turn to our justice secretary’s latest skirmish with the desirability or otherwise of police officers patrolling on our streets. I have sympathy for Mr MacAskill, and I believe that he has been misunderstood by the press and would never make such a comment. In communities across Scotland that are marginalised and threatened by criminality, the presence of effective and visible police officers offers the beginning of a safe and secure environment. It is therefore impossible to believe the cabinet secretary’s comments as reported. After all, the justice secretary has enough on his plate. Among other things, he needs to try to keep prisoners locked up in our prisons and to ensure that sufficient assets are seized from criminals and that actions taken under our drugs policy actually work. For almost a decade, we have suffered the impact of having around 55,000 problematic drug users in our communities. We spend more than £1 million of public taxes delivering methadone programmes in our prisons. The volume of methadone that is prescribed in the methadone programme in Scotland almost doubled in the three years to 2009, to almost 31,000 litres. Although there is a place for methadone treatment as part of a planned and delivered programme of recovery, future initiatives need to give each drug-addicted person the opportunity for health and a return to wellbeing and gainful employment. I commend Annabel Goldie for maintaining a focus on that area of Government policy. On the Supreme Court, I draw the justice secretary’s attention to the 11 June edition of The Daily Telegraph, where he will read that the Faculty of Advocates, the Law Society of Scotland, the Scottish Human Rights Commission and the campaign group Justice have all supported the Supreme Court’s sensible and proportionate rulings. Who pays the piper is not the issue—nor should it be. I hope that, as with the comments on patrolling police officers that were attributed to him, the cabinet secretary has again been misunderstood. Instead of holding summits about football matches and arguing over supreme courts, I would want the justice secretary to attend to the issues that affect normal people and their families and communities. The deaths of young men as a result of knife attacks continue, and their families are grieving. In addition to demanding justice, those families want a positive response from the authorities in order to prevent such crimes from being committed in the future. I can tell the cabinet secretary that the provision of high-profile policing after such events does little to give confidence to communities that are facing criminality week after week. I do not doubt the justice secretary’s sincerity in offering his sympathy, but we need to know what his plans are in this regard. Will he ensure that the victims will be placed at the centre of our criminal justice system and will he acknowledge that Children 1st continues to report the negative experiences that youngsters who attend court face? Will he share with us his intentions and will he offer to work in tandem with the Opposition parties in delivering, through the Justice Committee, actions that work and positive outcomes?

Presiding Officer, I am honoured to be given the right to speak in the Parliament today and I thank you for the opportunity. You can be assured that I will enjoy my lunch far more as a result of your timing. I congratulate the SNP on its electoral success and remind SNP members that, as they bask in ebullient pleasure, many Scots are quietly desperate about their home situation, worried about the state of our economy and about security, unemployment, education and local government services. The election campaign rightly focused on those issues. Now we have learned from the First Minister that there is an urgent need to revise BBC broadcasting policy, to change Crown estate ownership, for new controls over excise duty, for new European representation, for corporation tax and an agreed need for capital borrowing powers—a whirlwind that is bound to create conflict with UK colleagues at a time when we need to work effectively together. Many Scottish households now worry about the falling purchasing power of their incomes and a lack of employment that means, for many, part-time work rather than a full-time occupation. At the same time, too many youngsters are unable to get work because they lack the basic skills and our universities complain of huge shortfalls in their funding. Meanwhile, the Government’s message, delivered in detail via media bites, has focused on a creeping independence and tackling sectarianism as the means by which Scotland will turn around all that is wrong in our world. The arc of prosperity represented by Ireland and Iceland has become a non-truth.

The SNP has five years for intervention. The arc of prosperity has joined the promises of bullet trains between our cities and smaller class sizes—all airbrushed from history. Now, the focus is on sectarianism as the threat to Scotland’s future—a threat provided by a minority of inadequates whose activities can be dealt with by the proper enforcement and prosecution of existing law, backed by Scottish football authorities and clubs taking their full responsibilities seriously. Many religiously aggravated charges that are reported each year in Scotland relate to breach of the peace—a common-law crime that is not subject to any statutory limit on imprisonment. The Government’s commitment to dealing with sectarianism may be judged from official statistics that show that the number of recorded religiously aggravated crimes is currently around 600 to 700 a year. Compare that with race crimes, which run at around 4,000 annually. How many religiously aggravated crimes resulted in convictions? We do not know. If the passing of new laws is intended to display our collective disgust at sectarian behaviour while answering the threat of related internet activity, fair enough, but if the Cabinet Secretary for Justice cannot ensure enforcement, detection and prosecution, the rest is a waste of time. The level of commitment may be judged by the speed with which the serious organised crime task force has pushed on with the Scottish crime campus project. It is seven years old and has seen more Government launches than a Clydeside shipyard but, as yet, no buildings. While I am on the topic, I should say that our performance in terms of asset recovery in Scotland—at around £6 million to £7 million a year—pales into insignificance when compared with the official assessments that identify crime business in Scotland as being worth around £2 billion a year. Even our newspapers can identify the top 25 crime families in the country, with an identified net worth of more than £140 million. The Government must get real to ensure that criminal assets are seized. It should also abandon its current policy of allowing recovered assets to fund prosecution and law enforcement activities. All recovered assets should be returned to the communities from which they were stolen. Against that background, the preoccupation with constitutional change needs reassessment. The proposition that Scotland should be independent cannot rely on romantic notions of “Braveheart”, kilts, the gathering and the national conversation. [Interruption.] The First Minister is oft attracted to quote the greats of Scottish literature. He should remember that it was Robert Burns who thought that the Edinburgh politicians were “a parcel of rogues” who, in 1707, sold out this nation in the wake of the Darien scheme that had impoverished Scotland—a situation that chimes with the current difficulties. This nation does not deserve a second sell-out in the interests of a current elite who are happy to seize power and status for themselves. Should the Labour Party shoulder some blame for our financial ills? Of course it should. Instead of being mesmerised by big money and cheap credit, it should have stuck to genuine Labour principles of fairness, integrity and honesty. However, lest we forget, all the parties who are in this chamber had representatives at Westminster and Holyrood who were happy to enjoy the good times. In fact, if I remember rightly, the First Minister was a Westminster member during those years of plenty, before he returned to the opportunity of Scotland, praising as he came the Royal Bank of Scotland and HBOS as supreme examples of Scotland’s inherent strength. Let us therefore not be mesmerised by the rhetoric nor bemused by the direction of the Government’s intentions and let us not misunderstand the Government’s intentions, which are, above all, to leave the United Kingdom. [Interruption.] At a time when the world is dominated by the mega states of China, America and Russia, is our unique selling point to go small, and thereby risk alienation? I look forward to representing the constituents of South Scotland, and I hope that, as an opposition, we will hold to our sovereign duty to hold this Government to account in a constructive fashion and in good faith.