I lodged amendment 3 because I believe that the important principle of reasonable accommodation should be prioritised in assessing how to fulfil the public sector equality duty that is contained in the UK Equality Act 2010. As I said at stage 2, the public sector equality duty places a duty on public authorities to have regard to the need to eliminate discrimination, advance equality of opportunity and foster good relations, which includes the need to tackle prejudice. Many organisations, such as churches and religious charities, are at the forefront of tackling social problems in their area—for example, by working with the homeless or providing food banks. It must be made clear that the public sector equality duty should not be used to deny religious organisations that are known to be opposed to same-sex marriage the ability to provide public contracts or to hire public buildings, as many churches do. Public bodies should seek to make reasonable accommodation for religious groups in order to facilitate those organisations to maintain their ethos. For example, a local authority may claim that it would be in breach of the public sector equality duty if it were to give a grant towards the cost of a community project to, or enter into a contractual relationship with, a local church if that church were unwilling to marry same-sex couples. Similarly, public sector employees may find themselves being asked to act against their conscience if they believe in traditional marriage. Nobody who works in or seeks a career in the public sector in Scotland should have their equality and diversity credentials or their suitability for employment disputed merely because they hold to the existing view of marriage, whether expressed or not. At stage 2, Alex Neil said: “I understand the concerns that religious bodies have expressed. As well as making it clear that people who oppose same-sex marriage should not be denied public services or the use of public facilities, we have made it clear that religious bodies that oppose same-sex marriage will continue to be eligible for grants and public services. As I have said, any public services that are provided through public money must in principle be available to all.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 19 December 2013; c 1730.] I therefore urge Alex Neil to do exactly what he said at stage 2 and support my amendment.

11. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met NHS Lanarkshire and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02847)

I am delighted to hear that. Can the cabinet secretary confirm whether he has met directly with members of NHS Lanarkshire’s board, the expert team or Healthcare Improvement Scotland specifically to discuss the recent assessment of patient safety and quality of care in NHS Lanarkshire?

As the convener of the City of Edinburgh Council (Portobello Park) Bill Committee, I am pleased to open the preliminary stage debate. I thank my committee colleagues for their support and assistance throughout the process. My colleague James Dornan is not with us this afternoon, but my thoughts are with him. This is my first time as the convener of a parliamentary committee. I welcome the challenge, but I could not have met it without my colleagues’ support. I thank the committee clerks and the Parliament’s legal team for the advice that they have given me and other committee members and for the time that they have given to all aspects of the bill. I thank all who have assisted the committee in scrutinising the bill at preliminary stage, including the experts on common good law who provided evidence to the committee and the objectors, who have engaged in the process and assisted the committee in understanding the issues and concerns that the proposals raise. The bill is short, extending to only five sections, but it is nonetheless controversial. The action that it would facilitate—the building of a new high school in Portobello park—is not without its critics. The bill presents complex legal issues, which the committee was keen to understand in depth before considering the merits of and arguments against the proposal. The issue of a much-needed new high school for Portobello has a long history. The consensus appears to be that a new school is needed. Locating the school in Portobello park seems to be the key issue. Portobello park forms part of an area of land that was purchased by—not gifted to, as the committee’s report, which has now been corrected, originally inaccurately stated—the City of Edinburgh Council’s predecessor body from Sir James Miller in 1898. The purchase provided that the land was to “be used exclusively as a public park and recreation ground” for the community’s benefit and contained a condition against building on the park, other than building consistent with the land’s use as a public park or recreation ground. The park’s selection as the site for the school dates back to 2006, when the council agreed that it was the preferred location. Planning permission was granted in February 2011 and the intention was to appropriate the park for the new school. However, that was challenged in a judicial review petition in the Court of Session by the Portobello Park Action Group. In September 2012, the inner house upheld the petitioners’ appeal, on the basis that existing law on the disposal of common good land does not extend to the appropriation of inalienable common good land. That meant that the council could not move the site from its recreation function to its education function and therefore could not build the school on the park. The bill was introduced in April last year by the promoter—the City of Edinburgh Council. Its purpose is to remove the legal obstacle that the inner house identified in order to allow the council to use Portobello park as the site of the new Portobello high school. The bill would change the legal status of Portobello park from inalienable to alienable common good land for the purpose of part VI of the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973. That would allow the council to appropriate the land for its education function and build the school on the park. The bill does not authorise the building of the school, which is subject to the local authority planning process. Following its introduction, the bill was the subject of a six-week objection period, during which 66 admissible objections were received. At preliminary stage, the committee had to reject any objection to the bill that did not, in the committee’s opinion, demonstrate that the objector’s interests would be clearly adversely affected. In that context, and after considering each objection carefully, we agreed that seven of the objections did not pass the test and consequently rejected them. If the Parliament agrees to the bill’s general principles and that the bill should proceed as a private bill, the committee will look at the remaining 59 objections in more detail at consideration stage. In considering the bill’s general principles, the committee was sensitive to a number of recurring themes that objectors raised in relation to perceived key implications of the bill if it is enacted. In particular, the committee considered claims that the bill would set a precedent for councils to overturn the general protections that are afforded to inalienable common good land by using the mechanism of a private bill. Although we recognised that it would be open to other councils to follow that route if they so chose, any other such bills would have to be considered in their own circumstances and on their own merits. The bill makes specific application of the law only in specific circumstances and does not in itself change the general area of the law. We were therefore satisfied that the precedent argument was not sufficient for the bill not to continue to its next stage. We carefully considered the evidence that was provided on the key issue at the core of the bill: the apparent legal anomaly that exists in the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973, which allows a council, with the consent of a court, to dispose of inalienable common good land to a third party, but does not allow a council to use such land for a different purpose by appropriating it for another of its functions. One of the alternative legal approaches that the promoter considered, which some objectors highlighted as the mechanism that should be pursued, was a change in the general law to address that apparent legal anomaly. It was argued that a public bill would not only address the legal anomaly that was highlighted in this case, but have general application throughout Scotland. To ascertain whether there were any plans for a public bill or other Scottish Government action in relation to the matter, the committee contacted the Scottish Government. We were advised by the Minister for Local Government and Planning that the Government had not reached any decision on the matter, although it was consulting on its forthcoming community empowerment bill, which is intended to include provisions on the management and disposal of common good land. The committee noted that any potential Scottish Government legislation in connection with the issue was likely to be some time off. Although the committee is aware that this is not part of its specific role, we agreed that we would draw the attention of the Parliament and the Scottish Government to the suggestion that a change in the general law might be appropriate, regardless of the outcome of consideration of the bill. The committee also examined the other alternative legal approaches that the promoter had considered as options to achieve the same end. Those included appealing the inner house’s decision to the Supreme Court; reviewing the status of the park to establish whether it might be categorised as alienable common good land or not part of the common good; disposing of the park under section 75(2) of the 1973 act; applying to the court seeking authority to appropriate the park under section 75(2) of the 1973 act; and petitioning the Court of Session under the nobile officium, which, in essence, provides a legal remedy where one is otherwise unavailable. The promoter argued that none of the other alternatives would be as quick or as cost effective as promoting a private bill. The committee is satisfied that the promoter was justified in pursuing the private bill process as opposed to other possible legal options at this juncture. There was some dispute between the promoter and some objectors on what effect the bill would have on the longer-term status of the park. The promoter argued that its inalienable status would be removed only for as long as it was appropriated for an education purpose, but others argued otherwise in evidence. The committee is persuaded that, should the bill continue to consideration stage, an amendment should be lodged that would provide safeguards for any future use to protect the park’s inalienable common good status should it no longer be used for an educational purpose. As well as considering the general principles of the bill, private bill committees must take a view on whether the bill should proceed as a private bill. To that end, the committee had to satisfy itself that the bill conformed with standing order requirements in relation to the definition of a private bill and that the accompanying documents were adequate to allow proper scrutiny of the bill. On the first point, the committee was satisfied that the bill complies with the standing order definition of a private bill. We were also satisfied that the bill confers on the promoter powers in excess of the general law—in this case, the 1973 act. On the second point, the committee was required to consider each of the accompanying documents—the promoter’s memorandum, the explanatory notes and the promoter’s statement, which were lodged by the promoter—and take a view on whether those documents were fit for purpose. We considered, for example, whether the explanatory notes summarised what each provision of the bill does and provided other information to explain the effect of the bill, and whether the promoter’s statement detailed the arrangements that were made by the promoter regarding matters such as notification, advertising and distribution of the bill and accompanying documents. The committee was of the view that, overall, the accompanying documents were adequate to allow for scrutiny of the bill. Overall, we have carefully considered the arguments for and against the bill and, on balance, we are persuaded by the general principles of the bill. If the Parliament agrees, we will examine the objections in greater detail at consideration stage. I move, That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the City of Edinburgh Council (Portobello Park) Bill and that the bill should proceed as a private bill.

I was concerned to read in the report that “the management actions taken have not yet been sufficient to support safe, person-centred and effective care”, and that “consultants are finding the workload excessive.” The report also notes: “NHS Lanarkshire is particularly challenged as it needs to provide sufficient staffing across its three acute district general hospital sites.” NHS Lanarkshire has indicated that it accepts all 21 recommendations from HIS. Given that this is a devolved matter, what support will the Scottish Government provide to ensure that NHS Lanarkshire continues to deliver high-quality patient care, particularly at Monklands hospital?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I wish to make a point of order under rule 7.3.1 of standing orders and in relation to section 7 of volume 3 of the “Code of Conduct for Members of the Scottish Parliament”, as issued by you. Those provisions refer to general conduct and conduct in the chamber and say: “Members shall at all times conduct themselves in a courteous and respectful manner”. During this afternoon’s ministerial statement on the publication of a review of the safety and quality of NHS Lanarkshire, the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, Alex Neil, made three unsubstantiated points when addressing my question. He said: “There is no doubt about our commitment to Monklands—unlike that of the member, who wanted the Monklands A and E closed, campaigned for the mental health unit at Monklands to be closed and, I understand, is even suggesting that Monklands hospital should be closed.” Given that there is no evidence to suggest any of those things and that I refute his misinformation, I seek your guidance and confirmation that he has the opportunity to correct the Official Report to reflect the position accurately.

I rise to speak as a very proud member of the Labour Party and to address some of the points that Christine Grahame mentioned. I am proud that it was a Labour Government that introduced the equal pay act, the national minimum wage and the disability discrimination act, and I am proud of our record on childcare. I take no lessons from those on the SNP benches on that. I was extremely disappointed to read the Scottish Government’s motion, although I was not surprised in the slightest. The line that stood out for me was: “notes the progress made since the Women’s Employment Summit, which was held on 12 September 2012”. The reason for that? The Equal Opportunities Committee recently conducted a report into women and work. We made a number of recommendations on issues such as occupational segregation, flexible working and childcare. We received a response from the Government in relation to those recommendations that fell extremely short of the mark. The curious thing is that, in that response, there is no mention of progress being made since the women’s employment summit in 2012; there is just a simple statement saying that the summit took place. I welcome the fact that such a summit took place and I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government is working with its partner agencies on that important matter, but I do not believe that we should run before we can walk. The Scottish Government is aware that occupational segregation exists in the modern apprenticeship scheme. I fully recognise that that is an unintended consequence of the scheme. However, the committee stated in its report: “We remain concerned about occupational segregation in the modern apprenticeship scheme, an issue we raised in our budget report in December 2012. There is a gender imbalance in that women are not making it through levels 3, 4 and 5 of the scheme, an issue on which we seek Scottish Government comment.”

Absolutely—I was just getting to that point. However, the minister has still not answered the question about the funding, which has been put to her twice. I know that the Government has agreed to the awareness-raising campaign, but I would welcome more detail from the minister in her closing speech on how that will be achieved. How will it be run? Who will be targeted? How will they be targeted? How long will the campaign last? How will the Government measure the success of such a campaign? If we are truly to speak of progress in this area, we need action rather than warm words, however agreeable those words might be. I know that the Scottish Government’s superficial manifesto commitment for universal childcare was set out in the white paper. I have to tell the chamber that that promise has only angered people who are asking for help now. I am currently trying to help a couple who have had problems accessing childcare. That man and his wife both work full time and they are parents to five children aged six, five, three, two and eight months. They know that they will have to pay for their children’s nursery education, but that is not the problem. The couple made a simple request that all their children be placed at the same nursery school, but that request has been turned down repeatedly. The couple are more than aware of their entitlement; they are aware of what this Parliament has the power to do, so they are confused, upset and angry that this Government has done very little to help them and their situation. Of course, I have told them that, if they vote yes in the referendum, it will all be sorted for them—imagine their delight when I told them that. The couple are aware that the Scottish Government has pledged to extend free statutory early learning childcare for three and four-year-olds to 600 hours per year, but they know that without the crucial word “flexible” being added to that promise it will mean very little to them in reality. In the Equal Opportunities Committee’s report, we asked the Scottish Government what action it can take and we asked it to outline a timetable for the introduction of a statutory right to childcare, including older children and disabled children. The answer seemed to be that the first steps have to be taken through the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill. I am extremely disappointed by that response, given that the bill does not mention disabled children at all. It does not make any provision for after-school care either—something that many parents and guardians have problems securing. The Scottish Government has a moral obligation to do what it has promised. We need the action that is required now, not later.

The minister might have missed it, because she was having a conversation at the time, but I asked a number of questions about the awareness-raising campaign. Who will be targeted, how will they be targeted and how will the campaign’s success be measured?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I did dial 101 in that particular locality only a few weeks ago, and I was told not to report the crime on the phone but to go into the local police office, which I do not understand. Why was that? Members: Oh.

Last week, I and a number of colleagues from Lanarkshire met Healthcare Improvement Scotland’s review team. During what I thought was a productive meeting, the topic of patient-centred healthcare was a recurring theme. Many of the difficulties and concerns that members raised with the team were solely about putting the patient first. I raised my concerns about the issue; I feel that we are letting down patients and staff because we are not giving them the resources to deliver the vision that we all want. I am talking not only about financial resources; sometimes what is required is a clear vision from Government for those who are delivering on the promises. Far too often, that link is missing, which leads to one part blaming the other part, with the patient left in the middle. I understand that staff in our health service are under extreme pressure at present, which I would like to see being addressed in any forthcoming bill. Rather than add more to the workload of staff, we should try to reduce the burden that is placed on them. As a result of pressures, the little things are sometimes missed, such as GPs actually listening to what a patient says rather than hearing what they think the patient is saying. Currently, I am helping a gentleman who went to his GP in June with what he thought was a urinary infection. The GP prescribed a seven-day dose of medicine, despite the fact that my constituent informed the GP that he was prone to such infections and that a seven-day dose had never worked for him. Obviously, the GP dismissed those concerns and sent the man on his way. When he completed the course of medicine, the infection returned and he appeared back at his GP for more medication. Had the GP actually listened to his patient and his experiences, that might not have happened, and what was to follow might not have happened. My constituent was referred to a urologist at Hairmyres hospital in October. His appointment date was delayed, during which time he had to go back to his GP for yet more medication, as the infection persisted. He attended the clinic on 7 October and had various tests done, but was referred for further tests and told that an appointment would be forthcoming. When his appointment arrived, it was not for Hairmyres, as he was expecting, but for the Golden Jubilee hospital. He attended that appointment and had further tests done. My constituent still has the symptoms that he presented with to his GP in June and, five months on, has yet to receive a diagnosis. Will the Government’s vision for patient-centred healthcare actually make a difference to people in such situations, or will it be something that politicians speak of as an ideal rather than a reality? Recently, the Equal Opportunities Committee heard evidence from a number of disability organisations on the Scottish Government’s proposed budget. During that evidence, there was discussion of self-directed support, which Bob Doris touched on. It was clear that everyone supports the idea of SDS, but there is a great deal of concern and confusion about how it will work in practice. Pam Duncan of Independent Living in Scotland said about her experience of SDS: “I consider myself to be a particularly resilient person, but I went through the personalisation process very recently and I can honestly say that it just about broke me. It was the most demoralising, inhumane and degrading experience that I have ever had. However, I have come out of that at the other end still believing that self-directed support is absolutely the way to deliver social care. Self-directed support delivers choice, control, freedom and dignity in a way that the disability movement has campaigned for for many years, but it does that only at the end point when you get the budget rather than at the point when you get your assessment or become eligible for support.” On the same issue, a representative of the Glasgow Centre for Inclusive Living said: “there is no doubt that self-directed support is a good thing for disabled people. Where it works well, self-directed support is fantastically empowering, but that can be totally overridden by the lack of availability of funds. I think that the situation has become so serious that we need to take a long hard look at how we fund social care”.—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 10 October 2013; c 1631-2.] As I said, SDS is about giving individuals the choice of a care package that is suitable for their needs; that vision is shared by the majority of members in Parliament. I know that it is early days in the process, but we are already hearing about the difficulties that people are experiencing when trying to access the service. If a patient-centred healthcare system is to work, we have to learn the lessons from other similar policy initiatives. I ask the Government to look closely at the ways in which SDS is being implemented across the country and to learn from that. I thank the organisations that sent briefings for the debate; in particular, Inclusion Scotland’s briefing caught my attention. That body welcomes the move towards person-centred care, but it is concerned that the approach remains focused on management of conditions and not on the wider needs of the person, including access issues, how they are treated by others and support for independent living. Further, Inclusion Scotland states that disabled people have a real concern that, as worded, the Public Bodies (Joint Working) (Scotland) Bill might facilitate a move back towards the medical model of care rather than to development of a human rights based social model of care. It is essential that in any policy that is developed to obtain person-centred healthcare, we do more than simply adopt a social model of disability, and that the model is implemented at every stage of the healthcare system. If we go back to the medical model of disability, we will undermine the proposed approach at the very beginning. The cabinet secretary mentioned that primary care services should be tailored to the area. He will be aware that one size does not fit all people; for example, the Douglas Street practice in Hamilton has not fitted everyone. I listened to the cabinet secretary’s remarks and I welcome the additional money for the fund that he announced, but I ask him specifically to consider what patients tell us in their areas. It is not enough to say that the system in Lanarkshire works because—as, I am sure, he is aware—there are different aspects in Lanarkshire. If we are serious about person-centred healthcare, we need to review things that are not working for patients and individuals. At present, the system is not working for the people of Hamilton. I welcome the principle of the Government’s motion, but as I said at the beginning of my speech, if the vision is to be realised, the Government will need to provide all the resources that are required—financial, educational, training and leadership resources—for the policy to be achieved and for it to be a success for each person whom we represent. The policy should be about everyone, regardless of their needs. I hope that that can be delivered.

Tavish Scott made an important point. People were barred from even getting to the ballot stage, because they had to provide a photograph first, and if they wanted to make two, three or four applications they needed to register individual pictures for each one. That meant that people were barred from even registering, let alone getting to the ballot stage. The issue should have been addressed at an early stage.

I congratulate James Dornan on bringing this important debate to Parliament this evening, and I add my thanks to independent living in Scotland for publishing its report on the representation of disabled people in politics. When I first entered the Scottish Parliament, I was determined that I would not be known as the disabled member for Central Scotland. I remember that during the election campaign, a national newspaper ran an article highlighting the fact that Dennis Robertson and I had been selected to run as candidates. I found that quite disturbing because being disabled had never before been a characteristic by which I was defined. I would have thought that the article could have highlighted many things about me, but the writers seemed to be fascinated that we had been selected and that we each had our own disabilities. Having two years’ experience under my belt, I now know what the big deal was. I am proud to be a member of the Scottish Parliament, and I am proud to be a disabled person. Neither title defines me but I embrace them both. No one forced me to become a member of the cross-party group on disability; I wanted to do it because I thought that I could add value to the group, just as I thought that I could add value to the cross-party groups on Malawi and international development. I am always delighted and honoured to take part in conferences, debates or discussion panels that focus on disabled people, and I enjoy the challenge of those. However, I would be lying if I said that they do not provide me with my own set of challenges. It is a fine balance between being proud of being a disabled member of Parliament and being pigeonholed as one. I want people to look at me and think that I am doing a good job because I am, not that I am doing a good job despite my disability. That, in itself, can prove difficult. To my cost, I have found that not standing up every few weeks and sharing my latest private health concerns can leave me in a difficult situation. One example of that is campaigning. At the moment, I walk with a crutch when I have to walk long distances, so I cannot take part in the door-knocking sessions that are planned for the upcoming by-election. Of course, I can do other things to help the campaign, but the pressure of having to explain myself to anyone who asks why I am not doing my bit on the ground can be annoying, to put it mildly. I can understand why examples like that, trivial though they might sound to others, can put disabled people off politics. That is why the whips in each parliamentary group should be required to receive diversity training so that they become more aware of the distinct needs of the individuals in their group, and so that we become more inclusive in action and word. When I was doing a bit of research for this debate, I was concerned to see that so far no disabled person has been selected to represent Labour at the next general election. I found out because the party publishes data on that on its website. Although that is a disappointing statistic—

That could well be, but the point that I am trying to make is that if a disabled person does not have someone to look up to, to see that it happens in society, they are less likely to put themselves forward—as the report suggests. As I said, although the stats I mentioned are disappointing, my concern is not limited to the Labour Party, as no other party publishes such data so readily. If we are to challenge some of the barriers that are discussed in the report, it is important that all political parties become more transparent about their selection procedures. The Liberal Democrats have a disability association that anyone can join. That is a good example of inclusiveness and more groups like that should be established by political parties if we are to tackle the problems of disabled people’s representation in politics. That is why I am delighted to welcome the news from Scottish Labour this evening. The Labour Party has a proud history of equality. We are the party that established the first Minister for Disabled People and we are extremely proud of that. It has been suggested that the Scottish Government should look at replicating that and I hope that it gives serious consideration to doing so. I hope that the Government will also look at establishing the Scottish access to politics fund that so many organisations are calling for, as those organisations and I believe that that would be a start towards helping to remove some of the barriers that disabled people face when trying to become more active in politics, in order that it becomes less of a newspaper story when a disabled person is selected to fight a seat at an election in the future.

4. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to ensure patient safety at Monklands, Wishaw and Hairmyres hospitals. (S4O-02375)

Can the cabinet secretary confirm that, from 2012, Healthcare Improvement Scotland worked with NHS Lanarkshire to reduce the mortality rate by 15 per cent by 31 March 2013 from a baseline of November 2007? When did the cabinet secretary first become aware of the potential problem with the above-average mortality rates at Monklands and Wishaw? Will the findings of any work undertaken by HIS be published? Will the cabinet secretary outline what progress has been made to reduce mortality rate figures and to ensure that lessons are being learned in order that those hospitals can continue to deliver a high standard of care to all patients?

Like other members, I want to say how much I will miss Mary Fee as convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee—I am not sure whether she feels the same way. The committee certainly benefited from her leadership. I welcome Margaret McCulloch to the post and hope that she can follow in Mary Fee’s footsteps. She certainly did so this morning, especially given her early morning start. As I was writing my speech for this debate on Gypsy Travellers, I was trying to think of something positive with which to open. I failed to do that on this occasion—but before Scottish National Party members shout at me, let me say that my remarks are directed not solely at the current Government but at Governments that have gone before them, at every local authority in Scotland and at COSLA. Throughout the evidence sessions to the Equal Opportunities Committee, I heard consistently from Gypsy Travellers about the systemic failures to which they have been subjected for far too long by people who were in a position to help. The failure of leadership is key, as members pointed out. No one seems to want to take responsibility even for attempting to alleviate some of the problems that the Gypsy Traveller community faces on a daily basis. Our report aimed to be hard hitting, because all members of the committee thought that the problems that we had heard about, and which we had seen for ourselves on site visits, must be addressed now. In our evidence sessions, we were acutely aware that ours was not the first nor the second report that the Equal Opportunities Committee had undertaken on these matters, but very little has changed in all of that time. The lack of suitable sites for the Gypsy Traveller community across Scotland became self-evident as the committee travelled across the country, making numerous site visits. However, that was not the only problem with sites. On my site visit, John Finnie and I were invited into one woman’s home, which she shares with her husband and very young children. The caravan window had been smashed but had not been replaced, and all the heat from the woman’s small electric fire was escaping without bringing much warmth to her family. When we asked whether someone was coming to repair the window, she informed us that she rented the caravan from the housing association, which believed that it was her responsibility to replace the window, something that she could not afford to do. Although this woman paid her rent and council tax, she could not get a replacement window; if the same thing had happened in a bricks-and-mortar house, we would all be rightly outraged and asking the pertinent questions. In this instance, people simply shrugged their shoulders. It is simply not good enough for such situations to arise. However, we know that this matter is not a one-off, given that other members reported back to the committee similar if not worse situations. This is why the committee believed it important to stress the need for higher living standards on sites. Moreover, we believe it essential that Gypsy Travellers have the same rights and responsibilities as those living in fixed accommodation. For that to be more than a recommendation, we need the Scottish Government and local authorities—via COSLA if necessary—to put in place an action plan to tackle this sort of issue. We also need the housing associations responsible for some of the sites across the country to take their responsibilities in the tenancy agreement seriously and not see the agreement simply as something to be signed and agreed to only by the Gypsy Travellers themselves. I listened to the minister’s opening speech and I acknowledge that she understands our recommendation and that she is working towards a solution. However, we need action. I realise that she does not want to rush action and get it wrong, but it would be useful to have a timeframe for when such action is likely to take place. I recently visited the Gypsy Traveller site at Larkhall in South Lanarkshire to get a better understanding of the site provision in my own region. The residents told me that they felt it to be a good site and that the site manager was effective, but they wanted the site to be expanded to allow family members in other parts of Scotland to live there or visit. Given my experience of previous sites, I was delighted to hear that the people actually wanted to stay on the site. I know that Larkhall is not a one-off, but it is an exception. That situation cannot continue, and I urge the Scottish Government to work with its partners to collate information on how to make a site work not only for the Gypsy Traveller community but for the wider community. After all, the example I have just highlighted shows that it can be done. There is a fundamental issue with our society’s view of the Gypsy Traveller community. Too often, an all too prevalent attitude is to castigate this ethnic group as a problem community rather than see it as an asset to the wider community. The Scottish Human Rights Commission supports that analysis, describing discrimination against Gypsy Travellers as “the last bastion of respectable racism”. Tabloid journalism regularly demonises the Traveller culture and television programmes propagate the type of negative cultural stereotypes that have not been seen against any other minority community since the 1980s. As we have heard, MECOPP provided a briefing to committee members, highlighting the fact that elected representatives recently abused their positions in the media to attack the Gypsy Traveller community. Mary Fee has already read out certain quotes, but the chamber must acknowledge their importance. I know that members in this chamber will be appalled by such statements, but the truth is that the councillors in question are not the only ones with those appalling thoughts. After all, according to a Scottish social attitude survey in 2010, 44 per cent of people thought that Gypsy Travellers would be unsuitable as primary school teachers. If we are to tackle such discrimination, we need a national public awareness campaign aimed at tackling discrimination and racism against the Gypsy Traveller community. I know that the Scottish Government has already been in discussions about how best to carry that out. Although I acknowledge the minister’s comments on the matter, I urge her to come forward with a timetable for when such a campaign is likely to begin. She said that she was announcing the campaign to Parliament today, but the announcement had already been made in the Government’s response to the committee report. More information would certainly be helpful.

As Mary Fee stated earlier, if the levels of discrimination faced by the Gypsy Traveller community were happening towards any other “protected characteristic” as defined in the Equality Act 2010, there would be public outrage. It is simply not good enough for the treatment experienced by this group to have been allowed to continue for so long. I urge the Government to do everything in its powers to address this scandal now before it is too late.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it is providing to staff at the Philips Lighting plant in Hamilton following the company’s announcement that it will phase out the production of luminaires at the plant. (S4O-02327)

As the cabinet secretary said, the recent announcement came as a massive blow to the loyal and long-standing workforce in Hamilton. It was disappointing to learn that the jobs have been outsourced to other countries, including France and Poland. It appears that the loyal workforce at Hamilton has been totally disregarded in the decision that Philips took. I am also extremely concerned about the implications of the redundancies for the remaining workforce at the Hamilton plant. What assurances can the Scottish Government provide to the remaining workforce that it will do everything it can to guarantee their long-term future at the plant?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what plans there are to install automatic electronic defibrillators in secondary schools. (S4O-02222)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer, and I agree that training is required, as was highlighted in last Wednesday’s debate. However, the cabinet secretary will be aware that emergency situations are time critical and that every minute that passes without defibrillation reduces a person’s chance of survival by 10 per cent. Will the Scottish Government therefore take the lead in encouraging other local authorities across Scotland to install AEDs in all their secondary schools?

14. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met North Lanarkshire Council and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02178)

I recently met representatives of Airvolution Energy, which has submitted a planning application to North Lanarkshire Council for nine wind turbines on land between Harthill, Eastfield and Shotts. I was pleased to learn of its commitment to use local expertise and resources to carry out the work associated with construction on the proposed wind farm. It is also keen to help increase local employment by promoting skills training and apprenticeships.

What assurances can the minister give that any future wind farm planning applications will have a guaranteed provision for local employment opportunities, skills training and apprenticeships, which will help increase local employment and provide real community benefits?

I am pleased to speak in the debate. It is an important debate and one that I know will be followed with interest by many throughout Scotland, not least those joining us in the public gallery. I was surprised to learn that this is the first full debate on chronic pain that the Parliament has ever had, although a members’ business debate has been held on the subject. I am concerned that a subject that affects so many lives throughout our country has never been given this level of attention before. One thing that is certain is that this will not be the last debate we hold on this subject. I welcome the fact that the Scottish Government plans to implement the Scottish model for chronic pain and I am pleased that the NHS has already begun working with patients and clinicians to agree the most appropriate option for a Scottish intensive pain management service. As others have mentioned, the cross-party group on chronic pain has labelled the debate a landmark one. I hope that members of the group feel that this afternoon’s contributions have lived up to that status. According to NHS Scotland, chronic pain is very common. Around one in five people have continuous pain. In 2008, the Lanarkshire health survey showed that 26 per cent of Lanarkshire’s adult population was affected by chronic pain. That means that an estimated 120,000 people in Lanarkshire may live with pain. It is therefore pleasing to me that NHS Lanarkshire recognised that problem and was one of the first health boards in Scotland to offer primary care pain management services. We all know that access to NHS pain clinics can be a postcode lottery, and that becomes even more apparent for a regional list member. I am lucky that in my area, Central Scotland, if a constituent lives in the NHS Lanarkshire or NHS Forth Valley areas, they can access a primary care multidisciplinary pain management service. However, that is not the case for people who live in other areas of Scotland, which is why it is essential that we move to a clinician-led service across Scotland. Where you live should not determine the level of healthcare that you receive. As Jackie Baillie said, we should also provide enough clinicians and support for people who live in those areas. It is not good enough to say that the services are there when, of course, people have to wait their turn and are not seen correctly. I hope that that will be addressed in the consultation and the recommendations that the Scottish Government will make to NHS Scotland. In recent weeks, we have heard examples of people having to leave their home in Scotland and travel to England for the health treatment that they so vitally need and deserve. Those who suffer from chronic pain are no different. It is truly shocking that in 2013 someone who has a chronic pain illness such as ME, MS, arthritis or one of the many other conditions has to leave their home and travel to England for treatment—not just across the border, either, but to places such as Bath, in Somerset. I can only imagine what travelling that distance will do to someone who already suffers ill health. That is one reason why I welcome the Scottish Government’s intention to build our own dedicated service in Scotland. The other reason is financial. It does not seem reasonable to have spent more than £1 million in the past few years on sending people for treatment outwith Scotland, when other Scottish patients can and do get the help and assistance they require from their own health board. Of course, they will get that only as an out-patient, which is why the sooner residential accommodation is built, the better. Having read the briefings for today’s debate, I was concerned to note that, although Scotland has a good Scottish service model for chronic pain, that model is not implemented throughout Scotland. I would therefore be grateful to know what precise action the cabinet secretary will take to ensure that the model that the Government plans to implement will help everyone in Scotland. I have already welcomed the work that the Scottish Government is planning to do, but we all know that that will not happen overnight. It is therefore essential that the strategies, plans and clinics that are already in place give the much-needed help and assistance that is required by patients and their families today, and do not wait for the action that has still to come. I am not a member of the cross-party group on chronic pain, unlike others who have spoken today, although I am a member of the cross-party group on disability. It is through that membership that I met Susan Archibald. Susan has rightly been given credit by others in the chamber today for bringing this matter to the forefront of our minds as a result of the petition that she brought before the Public Petitions Committee. It is never easy to speak about the personal aspects of your life, particularly if that involves speaking about being disabled. Susan, however, went one step further and shared with us how desperate she had been to end the pain that she had felt consistently for more than 13 years. I know that Susan would not have taken such a decision lightly and that the last thing on her mind would have been to get praise for doing so, but it is by her brave actions that this subject has finally got the recognition that it deserves. Susan’s experience is all the more poignant because we know that she is not alone. Others will have contemplated ending their life and others will have done just that. We cannot allow another person to feel that way or indeed to take their life. As the cabinet secretary mentioned, it is crucial that mental health services are integrated into the future plans and strategies. Those vital services cannot be left outside the multidisciplinary approach. I believe that those services will be relied on heavily in the months and years to come, not only as a result of the mental anguish that chronic pain patients go through but because the issue will be compounded by welfare reform. Those who already receive benefits are going through their medical assessments now and some are finding themselves either being put on a lower level of benefit or having their benefits removed entirely. I know that that is not of the Scottish Government’s making, but I urge it to be mindful of chronic pain sufferers when looking at ways to mitigate that pernicious policy. I urge the Scottish Government to take action today to implement the Scottish model for chronic pain across Scotland and establish the specialist intensive pain management centre without delay. We cannot afford to wait any longer.

I congratulate Margaret Mitchell on bringing the debate to the Parliament. I have spoken in the Parliament about the use of AEDs in Scotland, so I welcome the opportunity to make a small contribution to the debate. When I spoke in November 2011 in my members’ business debate on the heartstart campaign that was being run by the British Heart Foundation and North Lanarkshire Council, I talked about the need to introduce emergency life-support training in schools throughout Scotland. I asked whether we could afford not to do such a thing. Since 2011, a number of schools have taken part in the training. However, it is still not a universal service throughout Scotland. The curriculum for excellence provides schools with the opportunity to add that training to the school day, but I would encourage the Scottish Government to do more in that regard so that, from now on, no pupil goes without ELS training. During that debate, I spoke about the heartstart campaign that is run by North Lanarkshire Council and led by the healthy lifestyle co-ordinator, Charles Fawcett. I told the chamber that a pilot was being run at St Ambrose high school in Coatbridge to better educate staff and pupils in the use of defibrillators. At that time, defibrillators—or AEDs—were not an integral part of the school building. That is why I was delighted to learn that North Lanarkshire Council had installed AEDs in all its 24 secondary schools—the first local authority in Scotland to do so. The cost of that initiative is £70,000. As we have heard, it is partly funded by North Lanarkshire Council, NHS Lanarkshire and Amey. The cost is nothing in comparison to the value that we get from a generation of life-savers in our communities. For every minute that passes without defibrillation in the aftermath of a cardiac arrest, the chances of survival decrease by 14 per cent. It is therefore essential that AEDs become more widely available. Ideally, they would be held in all public buildings, along transport routes, in private gyms and in all workplaces. I know that I am not alone in calling for those measures. Other members have mentioned that tonight and organisations such as the British Heart Foundation and AEDs in Scotland have also called for action. I hope that, in his closing speech, the minister will be able to commit to action on the matter. I have recently had the opportunity to attend two heartstart ELS training sessions in Lanarkshire. Those sessions were carried out by a volunteer from St Andrew’s First Aid. One session was given to young carers. I do not have to explain to members how vital that session was to those young people. The other session was given to teachers in order to train them in the use of the new AEDs. Those are essential sessions, which I have found invaluable. As members know, due to my disability, I have the use of only one hand. As a result, I have always shied away from going forward for a first aid course. However, from those sessions I now know some basic first aid. More important, I know that I can use AEDs very easily—far more easily than heart compressions. Without the education that programmes such as that offer, many of us would not be able to help if called on in an emergency. I therefore call on the minister to establish a programme of such training across Scotland. I congratulate North Lanarkshire Council and Charles Fawcett on the initiatives that they have introduced. I congratulate the heartstart campaign on providing ELS training throughout schools in Scotland and I congratulate Margaret Mitchell again on bringing the debate to the Parliament. I hope that AEDs will be in all our schools the next time we debate this important issue.

I am pleased to have been given the opportunity to close this important debate for Scottish Labour. As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I was involved in the evidence-taking sessions that were held to better inform us of the growing problems of youth homelessness. The debate has again highlighted the growing concerns that many of us across the chamber have about the issue. Stewart Stevenson raised mental health issues; Margaret McDougall, Anne McTaggart and John Finnie discussed the voluntary sector; and almost every speaker addressed welfare reform issues—even Alex Johnstone, although he is the only person in the chamber at the moment who is singing from his particular hymn sheet. Throughout the debate, the need for action has been clear. Those of us who are members of the committee and those who have been members of it are keen for the report to be seen not simply as a good document to read but as one that brings about action. As the report said, the committee welcomes the initiatives that the minister, Keith Brown, spoke about when he gave evidence—particularly the fact that financial education is now part of the curriculum for excellence. However, the report highlighted the need to do much more. Many have talked about the need for education in life skills, and the Minister for Housing and Welfare and the convener spoke about GIRFEC. We have to get it across that life skills should be taught in schools. Throughout the evidence, we heard young people say that they were let down by that. As John Mason said, teachers cannot do it all. They need support—we have to give them the tools. Linda Fabiani was correct to say that we need practical education. That came across in the report, too. Young people told us that no one had ever taught them how to clean a home. They have the home, but how do they clean it? That takes us back to the young person in Motherwell who said, “They gave me a house but they didnae tell me how to work it.” Another area that requires immediate action is access to community care grants, which Jamie Hepburn and Malcolm Chisholm, among others, mentioned. In evidence to the committee, Yvette Hutcheson, who has been mentioned, explained that those grants are supposed to be processed—including payment—within seven weeks on average, but “in reality, it takes more like 13 weeks. When a person is offered a house, they can go and see it a week later and get their keys and move in a week after that, but there can still be another three and a half months before they get a community care grant to buy basic things such as curtains, carpets and white goods.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 29 November 2011; c 136.] The committee heard that community care grants can be insufficient to cover basic needs, with people receiving £100 to furnish their entire property.

I welcome the fact that we have the power to do something. The fund has been around for only a short time, so we cannot evaluate it. However, I will discuss one of my concerns about it later. In October 2011, I spoke in the chamber about the opportunities brought about by the devolution of the community care grant to the Parliament. I highlighted the fact that many people—young and not so young—had to wait for their grant to be processed and as a result failed to keep their tenancy. I said at that time and in subsequent debates in December 2011 and in May and June last year that the devolution of the community care grant afforded us the opportunity to ensure that people who apply for the grant receive the money on the same day as they receive their keys. In October 2011, Alex Neil, the then Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, pledged to look seriously at whether the Government could take those suggestions forward. When he was asked at the committee whether the Scottish Government would consider ensuring that the community care grant was paid on the same day as a young person got the keys to a new tenancy, the then Minister for Housing and Transport, Keith Brown, said: “It is important that we try to ensure that everything is in place at the appropriate time ... I can see the benefit in people getting the community care grant at the same time as the tenancy, but I would have to ... look at the issue in more detail.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 26 June 2012; c 570.] As I said earlier to Dennis Robertson, I am pleased that the Scottish welfare fund seems to be making applications a little easier for people. However, Citizens Advice Scotland states: “Community care grants are discretionary, which means that even if you are eligible, you will only get a grant if the local authority decides that your need is important and there is enough money left in the budget to pay you a grant.” Although the Scottish welfare fund was introduced only in April, we should look at that issue again. I would be grateful if the minister provided an update on the progress that is being made with the initiative, given the need to make the payments work for those who need them most. The report highlighted the case of Yvette Hutcheson, who received support from Quarriers when she became homeless. She wished to attend her local college when she was living in a homeless unit, but she could not secure a place, as she did not receive funding for that, and her place in the unit would have been in jeopardy. Linda Fabiani and James Dornan also spoke about that. No one in the chamber would want any young person to be deprived of a place at college or university as a result of where they stayed. Yvette Hutcheson’s case was not the only one that was highlighted in evidence to the committee. It is therefore imperative that the Scottish Government and its partners commit to looking into the issue further and to discussing with the UK Government what more can be done. Education is devolved, housing benefit payments are now devolved and student loans are our responsibility, which is why it is important that we consider what more we can do as a Parliament and that we make representations to the UK Government to ask for any relevant powers to be devolved, when that makes sense. The condition of the houses that are offered to young people has been highlighted. Alex Johnstone, Malcolm Chisholm and John Mason spoke about the private sector’s role in that. The minister will know that, at the time of the previous budget, Scottish Labour called for more money to be put into housing. Although that would not alleviate the problems now, it might do so in the future. It would help to alleviate the problems that Dr Paul Monaghan of the Highland Homeless Trust spoke about when he said: “My experience is that the availability of housing to young people is poor and is getting worse. The housing that is offered to them is typically of very poor quality. The standard of customer care that a homeless and vulnerable young person receives from many agencies is very low, partly because few young people have the ability to complain about or challenge appropriately the services that are provided to them.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 29 November 2011; c 139.] I am sure that we would all agree that it is scandalous that young people who are already in a vulnerable position are subjected to such low levels of housing provision. It is not acceptable that young people who have been forced into homelessness are treated in that manner. I would be grateful to know what action the Scottish Government has taken in the light of the comments and recommendations in the report. Finance is of course the biggest barrier to action being taken. I hope that the Government will look seriously at the points highlighted by many members, particularly my colleague Anne McTaggart, and that it will do everything in its power to ensure that no young person is denied a home, an education or the support that they desperately need in the future as a result of a lack of funds afforded to them.

I welcome that. We do not want a postcode lottery, with one local authority giving a grant and another not. Will the minister look across Scotland, once the arrangements have had time to bed in, to ensure that the scheme meets its statutory aim and is not something that is left to each local authority to decide?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what emphasis it places on its work on equality. (S4O-02068)

In light of the recent announcement, will the minister explain why the religion aspect of equality remains part of the justice portfolio, while the rest of the protected characteristics fall under her remit as Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport? What is the justification for that?

15. To ask the Scottish Government what educational programmes there are to help schools tackle sectarianism. (S4O-01999)

Does the minister agree that education is the key to tackling sectarianism among young people? Is he aware of the Mark Scott leadership for life award, which, over the past 15 years, has helped to bring together young people who are often separated by their different backgrounds, by sectarianism, by racism or by territorialism? Will he join me in congratulating the pupils of Cardinal Newman high school and Bellshill academy who successfully took part in the Mark Scott leadership award community project?

Presiding Officer, “We have improved social services ... we are building hospitals. We are opening new schools (I remember they used to blame me for keeping back the schools to make way for new houses. It wasn’t true even then; and it certainly isn’t true now. On average every week in this country ten new schools are opened.) ... Our general economic prospects are good ... Indeed, let us be frank about it. Most of our people have never had it so good.” Most members will realise that the person whom I have just quoted is Harold Macmillan, but they would be forgiven for thinking that it was John Swinney, such is the similarity of words used when discussing the provision of public services. Mr Swinney would like us to believe that things are great in communities across Scotland, that our education services are not crumbling under the pressure of a lack of resources, that our health service is not collapsing under the strain of financial constraint and that we can continue to fund everything for everyone. Those of us in the real world know that that is not the case. We also know that, when Mr Swinney is being honest with himself and with his Cabinet colleagues, he knows that, too. During recess, I reflected on the subject of the debate and on what universal services mean to me. Each time that my thoughts have turned to the debate, I have been struck by how negative they are: “something for nothing”, “cuts commission” and “bitter together” are the words that come to mind first. Of course, those are not my words or ideas that I would associate myself with; those are the words that SNP members use to try to control the debate. Instead of stepping up to the challenge and working constructively to come up with an answer on how we fund universal services, the Scottish Government would rather use those negative words and phrases as a human shield to deflect attention from the real issues that are affecting people across the country. We all know that the current levels of public spending are unsustainable, yet the Scottish Government does nothing to help to alleviate the problem. During a recent Finance Committee meeting, John Swinney said: “There is no lack of political leadership; the Government could not be clearer about its view on how we should proceed.”—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 9 January 2013; c 2023.] However, everyone is still looking to him for the answer. If there was true political leadership on the issue, he would have come to the chamber today and told us how the Scottish Government will continue to fund universal services. We know that the current levels of public spending are unsustainable and that our country cannot afford to fund every service for everyone without raising money through increased taxation, yet the Scottish Government continues to spend money without being honest about the consequences. That is not showing political leadership. Let me be clear that I do not wish to take travel entitlement away from disabled people; I do not want to introduce £9,000-worth of tuition fees for students; I do not want to increase council tax by 30 per cent; and I do not want people paying to use their local hospital. I cannot be clearer about that. However, I also do not want someone with a brain injury or epilepsy losing her entitlement to have a companion travel card because she has been told that there is not enough money to go around. I know that there is enough money to go around; it is just that the wrong decisions are being made about the money that is available. I do not want another local bus service to be lost because of a lack of investment in that sector. Since March 2011, 136 bus services in Scotland have been lost. That means that those who rely on public transport are having to do without. That is not the society that I want to live in. There is nothing fair about that. Those are just two examples of the consequences if we do not address the issues of public spending. I have heard many times in the chamber that the SNP has wiped out student debt for Scottish students. It always puzzles me when such statements are made. I graduated in 2006 and, as a result, I pay the graduate endowment fee. I do not begrudge paying that, so it does not annoy me that my student debt has not been wiped out. However, it annoys me that SNP members say that they have wiped out all student debt, when of course that is not the case. It annoys me that the Scottish Government has done nothing to address the student loan system. As most members will know, student loans are awarded to students on the basis of their parents’ or guardians’ income, not the student’s income. That does not take into account the number of dependants that a parent or guardian may have, whether the student has a part-time job or the distance that a student has to travel. It would have been a far better idea to address student finance than to grandstand on the issue of wiping out student debt for a select few—there is nothing fair about that. There is also nothing fair about parents opting to pay for their child to go to nursery school, primary school and secondary school and expecting the average taxpayer to pay for that same child to go to university. The Government has done nothing to address that; instead, it wipes out the parents’ financial obligations, too.

There is nothing fair about a council tax freeze. It is not fair that I have had my council tax frozen for yet another year, when I can afford to pay more. I could contribute to ensuring that vital local services continue, but of course my local authority was not given that option.

It is wrong that local authorities have their revenue-generating power stripped from them year on year and then get the blame for reduced services. It is time that the Scottish Government owned up to its role in that. Professor David Bell recently stated that, if Scottish local authorities increased council tax at the same rate as those in England, they would generate an additional £300 million, approximately, by 2016-17. To maintain the council tax freeze, the Scottish Government will have to increase its compensation to local authorities for the lost income. In turn, that will increase local authorities’ dependency on Scottish Government funding. I do not believe that that is political leadership in action—in fact, it is the complete opposite. I cannot support the Scottish Government paying £70 million of taxpayers’ money to local authorities to ensure a council tax freeze, when the money would be better spent on addressing the problems of the bedroom tax in our communities. However, the political leadership on show from the Scottish Government will of course not allow that. I hope that the Scottish Government will now look seriously and urgently at public spending on universal services and take on board Labour members’ genuine concerns about the matter.

I congratulate my colleague James Kelly on securing tonight’s debate, particularly as it gives me another opportunity to speak about my visit to Malawi. I never tire of speaking about the subject, and I hope that I have not exhausted the patience of those who have to listen to me recount my experiences again and again and again. In my previous speeches, I have spoken about the schools and prisons that I visited while I was in the warm heart of Africa in June. I have also expressed my admiration not only for the people whom I met in Malawi, but for those who travelled with me from Scotland, especially the pupils of Coatbridge, St Andrew’s and St Margaret’s high schools in Lanarkshire. However, when reflecting on today’s motion, I decided that I will talk about another aspect of my visit that I have not shared with many people since I returned. As members will know, Dr Livingstone is known for his missionary work. Although he is recorded as having converted only one African to his religion during his life, we know that the success of his work went much wider. As a Catholic, I found my visit to Malawi very difficult at times. We attended numerous services while we were there, including a mass to celebrate Corpus Christi, which was a three-hour service in the heat of Africa. It was not the weather that was particularly troubling—although it makes me glad to attend my local parish in Motherwell knowing that I will not get sunburnt or get sore knees from kneeling in the gravel. No—it was the fact that I was questioning my faith so much during that journey. Why would my God not save the children from this fate? Yet, the Malawians walked for miles in their Sunday best, and stood for hours singing and dancing and rejoicing with others. That image has consoled me since I returned to Scotland and was at the forefront of my mind as I began my holy week preparations. I am sure that I am not alone in having questioned my faith during a visit like that, and I am sure that Dr Livingstone went through some of that. However, he overcame that to better our understanding of what the people of Africa, and of Malawi in particular, want and need from us. We need only ask them and listen carefully to their answer to get a true understanding of human nature. “Friendship” was the most common answer that I got when I asked the question, “What can I do for you?” While in Malawi, I met a beautiful young girl called Rebecca, who is severely disabled. Being disabled myself, I was asked to meet Rebecca to provide her with some words of comfort and encouragement. Never before have I felt so much out of my depth than during my encounter with that amazing young girl. We all know that in Malawi, as in Africa in general, women are viewed as being inferior to men and young girls do not have the same opportunities or access to education as their male counterparts. One can only imagine how a person like Rebecca is treated. Some disabled people are shunned by their families and communities because they cannot afford to look after them, or because they think that their disability is a result of witchcraft. Rebecca is fortunate in that regard, as she still has her mother. Her mum walked with her daughter on her back each and every morning to ensure that her daughter got to school—a journey of 40 minutes. The mother also picked up the girl from school and returned her to the village, where she can play with her siblings. Think for a minute how difficult it must be for that mother and what sacrifices she has made to allow the simple act of her child going to school to happen. Thankfully, Rebecca now has a wheelchair, which she pedals with her hands, that takes her to and from school and enables her to participate in her community, but what happens to others like Rebecca? Part of the answer is, of course, provided by missionaries. They are the individuals whom disabled people in Malawi and beyond rely on. That is possible only as a result of David Livingstone’s legacy, which is something in which we should all take pride. We must all learn from David Livingstone and what he was trying to promote. It is simply not enough to leave it up to others to do the work for us. A wheelchair costs less than £100, yet a friend of Rebecca with a similar disability is still going without. She has to walk, without shoes, on the gravel road and paths to get to school. She and others like her need our help. Therefore, I ask members in the chamber and those listening in the public gallery and beyond to take up the challenge, which David Livingstone laid down for us, by doing our own piece of missionary work to better the lives of others, both at home and abroad.

I congratulate Neil Findlay on bringing the debate to the chamber. It is vital that the matter is highlighted in this way and that the sentiments of the motion are progressed to the highest level. I know that Neil Findlay will not give up until that happens, and I assure him that his colleagues on the Labour seats will give all the support and assistance that we can give in order to make that happen. As I was born in 1984, I cannot remember the miners’ strike of 1984-85. Some would say that I am lucky in that respect. However, that miners’ strike and the strikes of the 1970s are not lost on me and have gone a long way in helping to define my politics. As I have lived in Lanarkshire all my life, I know how important the mining industry has been and continues to be in my part of the world—be it Shotts, Harthill, Gartsherrie, Greengairs, Allanton or my home town of Bellshill. Lanarkshire had nearly half of Scotland’s pits in 1910 and continued to thrive until the last pit closure in the 1980s. I am an MSP for Central Scotland, so I am acutely aware that not only Lanarkshire benefited from the industry; Falkirk also has a proud history in the field, and Larbert, Bo’ness and other towns are testament to that. My grandpa was a miner and was very proud of his profession. He was determined that his grandchildren would know the sacrifices that men like him had made. That resulted in many family visits to Summerlee when I was younger—visits which I know many families in Lanarkshire and beyond continue to make. My grandpa was working in one of the two pits at Auchengeich in 1959 when disaster struck and killed 47 men, leaving many families and communities in Lanarkshire devastated, even to this day. That is the sacrifice that miners make—they give their lives. Only by knowing of that tragedy and others like it can one truly appreciate how truly galling was the treatment of miners by South Yorkshire Police at Orgreave. Despite the fact that 95 miners were awarded compensation in 1985, no police officer—or anyone from the Government—has ever been held to account. It is beyond belief that people were persecuted for simply exercising in their democratic right to strike. More than half the country’s mineworkers chose to strike as a result of the significant job losses that were occurring at that time. Let us remember that 20,000 jobs were under threat. Strike action is never an easy option, but such was the concern over the future of the industry and the other industries that depended on it, that it was the only option available to the men and their families. Brenda Procter, who was chair of National Women Against Pit Closures, said: “I am proud to have been involved. It wasn’t about money or hours or pay, it was about communities and jobs and the future of our children for generations to come.” That is why I support those who are calling for a Hillsborough type inquiry, which must look at the whole of the UK. I do not believe that the incidents at Orgreave were isolated, so it is now time for the Scottish Government to take action. The Scottish Government should not only add its voice to those who are calling for an investigation, but should carry out its own investigation for the 900 miners who have already emailed Kenny MacAskill and the many more who will follow. Too many miners have died with a criminal conviction to their name. It is for those men and their families that we should do all that we can to clear their names and join our own loyalty parade, albeit that we are 29 years on from the original events. I hope that the Scottish Government will now do the right thing and order an investigation here.

Does the cabinet secretary believe that the Lanarkshire regional lead or the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council has appropriate control over how the merger process is being conducted between the three colleges?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what preparations it has made for the impact on housing of demographic change, in light of the Finance Committee’s recent report, “Demographic change and an ageing population”. (S4O-01816)

The minister will be aware that the number of pensioner households requiring adaptation is projected to increase from 66,300 in 2008 to 106,000 in 2033. Concerns have been raised about the current funding system for adaptations.

The adaptations working group has stated that increased funds are likely to be necessary and has recommended the creation of “a single local funding pot”. Does the minister plan to act on that recommendation?

I read with interest the exchange in the chamber in October last year between Michael Russell, Neil Bibby and Liz Smith, during which Mr Russell stubbornly insisted that waiting lists are “a false concept”. Some people, when confronted with facts that they would rather not face, have a propensity to create their own reality. If the world does not fit with their world view, the world is simply the wrong shape and must be bent and twisted until it is the right shape. In this alternative universe, Scotland gains automatic entrance to the European Union; our hands flow with gold on the day after independence; the college budget is going up, not down; and college waiting lists are a false concept and do not exist. If only life were so simple. Sadly for all of us in general, and Mr Russell in particular, it is not. The Scottish Government’s interim report shows that waiting lists definitely exist. For those of us who are familiar with the recent Audit Scotland report on colleges, the potential extent of unmet demand is not surprising. We cannot reduce real-terms college funding by 24 per cent over four years and expect there to be no impact. In attempting to explain why waiting lists are a false concept, one of the mitigating factors that Mr Russell referred to is duplication. However, as the interim report makes clear, duplication accounts for only 9 per cent of the total from the seven colleges that are included in the sample. Moreover, the extent to which duplication can be cited as a legitimate factor varies according to the number of colleges and the availability of courses within a specific area. Some communities are within commuting distance of several colleges; others are not. Residents in North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire have access to four colleges but residents in the Falkirk area have access only to Forth Valley College. It is therefore unlikely that applicants to Forth Valley College will submit multiple applications to other colleges or will apply to other colleges if their application to Forth Valley College proves unsuccessful. In addition, although Forth Valley College has multiple campuses—at Stirling, Falkirk, AIIoa and Clackmannan—some courses are available only at certain locations. For example, only the Falkirk campus offers all three of the business courses and all five of the construction courses. Civil engineering and chemical science are available only at Falkirk. The combination of limited places and awkward geography will leave failed applicants with few alternatives and many successful ones facing a lengthy commute that will add significantly to their financial burden. With youth unemployment stubbornly high and the economy still in the doldrums, we should be doing everything possible to help young people to get the education and training that are necessary for them to secure long-term, sustainable employment or to progress to higher education. Well-funded and adequately resourced colleges are essential to that goal. However, according to the Audit Scotland report that I referred to earlier, colleges are likely to face “significant financial challenges in the years ahead”, due in no small measure to the Scottish Government's decision to drastically reduce further education funding. Meanwhile, some colleges are already under financial strain. In 2010-11, Forth Valley College had the second-highest operating deficit of any college in Scotland, at approximately £2.4 million, or 7.7 per cent of its income. It also had a £6.6 million deficit in its pension reserve. As Audit Scotland has made clear, without a U-turn by the Scottish Government, things are unlikely to get any easier. While law degrees at prestigious universities are increasingly the preserve of a privileged few, more than 20 per cent of college entrants come from Scotland’s most deprived communities. They will be the disproportionate victims of Mr Russell’s assault on further education. If that were not bad enough, yesterday we learned that, in 2011-12, 490 fewer college students from deprived backgrounds received an education maintenance allowance than did in 2010-11. That is the grim reality, yet all that we get from Mr Russell are cuts and excuses, posturing and pomposity. The cabinet secretary can continue creating his own reality, but those of us who live in the real world are genuinely concerned about the cuts to college budgets—cuts leading to fewer lecturers, fewer courses, fewer places and, yes, higher waiting lists. I have, therefore, no hesitation in joining my Labour colleagues in calling on the cabinet secretary to put an end to this embarrassing episode by apologising unreservedly and reversing his damaging and short-sighted cuts to the further education budget.

A report produced last year by a group of Scottish GPs who compared notes on the impact of welfare reform on some of Scotland’s most deprived areas identified one overriding issue: a huge increase in the number of patients presenting with deteriorating mental health. The patients fell roughly into two groups: those who had been well but were suffering from anxiety and depression because of job insecurity and financial pressures; and those whose welfare payments for poor mental health had been removed on reassessment. One GP described the test that his patients were subjected to as “unnecessary and avoidable” and another described the decisions reached as “medically inappropriate”. The report not only revealed systemic failure but uncovered a startling absence of understanding and imaginative sympathy. The lack of compassion for mental illness is not confined to the welfare system; it permeates society on both sides of the border. I welcome the Scottish Government’s recognition of the severity of mental illness and its subsequent commitment to improving Scotland’s mental health as outlined in its mental health strategy for 2012 to 2015. As the strategy states, although we have made great strides in recent years, there is still much to be done.

I am sorry—I cannot do so at the moment. If we are to make those improvements, it is essential that we listen and act on the advice of medical professionals, mental health charities and service users. We must also endeavour to ensure that national strategies such as the mental health strategy are adhered to both in word and in action. In January 2011, NHS Lanarkshire published “Modernising Mental Health Services in Lanarkshire”, a set of proposals aimed at rebalancing the delivery of mental health services “away from institutional models ... towards community based provision” and as such aligned to the “long-term trend” articulated in the mental health strategy. It was recommended that the number of psychiatric beds be reduced by consolidating acute in-patient mental health services at two dedicated facilities: the first in North Lanarkshire at Wishaw general, where an intensive psychiatric care unit would also be situated, and the other in South Lanarkshire at Hairmyres hospital. The wards would be fully equipped and resourced to provide complex treatment and care. The proposals were influenced by an extensive consultation process encompassing health professionals, local and national politicians and umbrella bodies representing service users. The Scottish Government was also fully behind the plans, with the former health secretary, Nicola Sturgeon, stating that she was “content that NHS Lanarkshire proceed to implement its proposals to modernise mental health services across the board area.” One individual who vocally opposed the proposals was the MSP for Airdrie and Shotts Alex Neil—and I am sorry that he is not in the chamber to hear what I am about to say. The proposals were due to be presented to the NHS Lanarkshire board in September 2012 for approval, but that did not happen. When I investigated, I was told that the new Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing, the aforementioned Mr Neil, had “asked for some time to review the proposals.” On 26 September, Mr Neil confirmed the delay in this chamber, stating that NHS Lanarkshire is “revising its original proposal for ... mental health” services “at Monklands.”—[Official Report, 26 September 2012; c 11895.] When I wrote to Michael Matheson, who I was advised had ministerial competence on this issue, to query this apparent U-turn, he informed me that the Scottish Government had “some reservations” about NHS Lanarkshire’s proposals. On 19 December, I asked Mr Neil in this chamber when he, or any other individual acting on his behalf, had “last contacted NHS Lanarkshire regarding the” provision “of mental health services” at Monklands hospital. He told me he had “decided early on in my tenure to give responsibility for that matter to my deputy Michael Matheson, as I did not want any perception of any potential conflict of interest between my role as MSP for Airdrie and Shotts—where Monklands hospital resides—and my role as cabinet secretary.”—[Official Report, 19 December 2012; c 14922.] I have since seen an email from the deputy performance manager at the directorate for health workforce and performance regarding the decision to delay the proposals to modernise mental health services. The email, which was sent to the head of communications at NHS Lanarkshire, states: “Mr Neil has confirmed ... that he is reviewing the proposals before a decision is made, and that decision will be made soon.” That was sent on 15 September 2012, less than 10 days after Mr Neil was appointed cabinet secretary. I will recapitulate: until September 2012, when Nicola Sturgeon was replaced as health secretary by Alex Neil, NHS Lanarkshire’s modernisation of mental health proposals had the Scottish Government’s approval. Then Alex Neil took over and expressed “reservations”, and a decision was deferred while NHS Lanarkshire revised the proposals at the cabinet secretary’s behest. I find this turn of events both confusing and frustrating—and I am not the only one. I have received a letter from Francis Fallan MBE, the chairperson of Lanarkshire Links, on behalf of mental health service users in Lanarkshire, that expresses “great disappointment” at the cabinet secretary’s decision to intervene to delay the proposals. The letter refers to the “rigorous” consultation that informed NHS Lanarkshire’s modernisation of mental health proposals, which Lanarkshire Links supported. The letter states: “what is most important is that all decisions are taken in an open, honest, and informed way.” It closes by asking: “why are we now being ignored?” That is a very good question. Attached to the letter are the views of some of the Lanarkshire Links members. One individual sums up matters perfectly by saying that “Two years of consultation and hard work” have been “turned round” and we are “back to square one”. NHS Lanarkshire officials devoted time, effort and expertise to producing the modernising mental health proposals. They consulted widely. Health professionals and service users agreed with the proposals, as did Nicola Sturgeon, but Mr Neil did not agree and, because of that, the plans were shelved, apparently indefinitely. We are left asking: does the cabinet secretary agree with the fundamental components of the mental health strategy or does he favour a piecemeal approach whereby a strategy is adhered to or ignored depending on who is the health secretary at any given time? To quote one disillusioned member of Lanarkshire Links: “Can we get a straight answer from Mr Neil?”

I welcome the Scottish Government’s decision to revise and update the Scottish planning policy. I hope that doing so in line with development of the national planning framework will guarantee some cohesion between Scotland’s planning objectives and the manner in which they are delivered. The provision of a transparent and effective national planning policy is essential if Scotland is to make the most of its economic potential. However, we must ensure that any such policy also safeguards the rights of local communities. As an MSP for Central Scotland, I have had recent experience of how the Scottish planning policy is being applied. Unfortunately, that experience has been largely negative. Of particular concern is the pre-eminence that is afforded to Scotland’s renewable energy commitments—particularly in relation to the development of wind farms and energy-from-waste plants. In the past year, I have dealt with a number of residents of Fortissat in North Lanarkshire who are frustrated about what they perceive to be a lack of responsiveness to their concerns about the extent of wind farm developments. Black Law wind farm, which ScottishPower Renewables operates, is the largest development in the area. It numbers 52 turbines. Consent has been received for its phase 1 extension and an application for its phase 2 extension is being considered. When that is taken in conjunction with a separate development proposal from Infinis for a further eight turbines at nearby Damside, an area that contained no turbines just 10 years ago could soon have more than 90 turbines. If the Damside wind farm progresses as planned, turbines will be situated within 1.3km of the village of Allanton and within 1.5km of the village of Stane, in apparent contravention of the proximity principle. Local residents’ concerns are, therefore, understandable. The reason for the exponential rate of development is that North Lanarkshire Council has identified the area as being a suitable location for wind farms. According to a letter that l received from ScottishPower Renewables, that identification “encourages onshore wind developers to focus their activity” in the area “in order to protect more sensitive locations.” What that means in practice is that, after an initial wind farm proposal has gained approval and the necessary infrastructure has been implemented, the area immediately becomes attractive to, and is targeted by, other developers. As a consequence, there are now a further 10 applications for wind farms in the vicinity of Black Law. The current Scottish planning policy does not appear to have a robust mechanism for containing such development. It merely states: “When considering cumulative impact, planning authorities should take account of existing wind farms, those which have permission and valid applications for wind farms which have not been determined.” That does not constitute a sufficient safeguard against selected areas becoming inundated with proposals. The Government has set a target of generating more than 50 per cent of electricity from renewable sources by 2020. Onshore and offshore wind farms, along with energy-from-waste facilities, are cited as two viable sources of renewable energy. I welcome any target that will make energy production more sustainable in the long term, but I am concerned that the targets encourage in planning authorities a predisposition to look favourably on renewable energy applications and to give less regard to their merits and to local communities’ wishes than is perhaps appropriate. I have no doubt that fellow members will have seen the story in today’s Daily Telegraph that reveals that ministers have received 9,868 protests about wind farm developments of more than 50MW in the past five years. Despite that, they have approved approximately 80 per cent of the applications on which they have ruled. When I wrote to Mr Mackay, at my constituents’ request, to ask him to consider placing a moratorium on further wind farm developments in the Fortissat area, he said that such a move would be “unprecedented, particularly as a mix of renewable energy sources are required in order that the Scottish Government achieve its ambitious targets for ... generating electricity from renewable sources.” The Scottish Government has announced its intention to allocate £673,000 to help planning authorities to deal with wind farm proposals, which indicates that an increase in applications is expected. I do not object to wind farm developments per se, but I am anxious that certain areas may become saturated, to the detriment of local communities, so I urge the minister to consider that closely in updating policy.

I welcome the minister’s clarification, and I hope that that is what will happen in practice. The Scottish Government’s renewable energy commitments are also having a tangible impact on applications for energy-from-waste facilities. A number of applications have been made for such facilities in Lanarkshire, the most high profile of which is Shore Energy’s proposal to build a pyrolysis plant near Carnbroe in Monklands. Following a lengthy local consultation, the proposal was declined by North Lanarkshire Council’s planning and transport committee in March 2010 on a number of grounds, chief among which were that it was contrary to the local development plan and there was insufficient evidence that it would not be detrimental to the health of the local community. However, the decision was on appeal overturned by Scottish Government reporters, who stated that the incinerator was urgently needed in order to work towards zero-waste policy targets. In reversing the decision, the reporters effectively dismissed more than 6,000 objections from local residents. Since then, a local protest group called Monklands residents against pyrolysis plants—MRAPP—has fought an unstinting battle to reinstate North Lanarkshire Council’s original judgment.

Because Chic Brodie started by saying that he disputes the facts, I do not think that there is any merit in his intervention. As I have stated in previous debates, particularly debates about such plants—I have spoken on three occasions on the issue—I am for going with renewable energy targets as they are, and the pyramid effect, and not simply burning waste in the area. We can do some things to implement renewable energy proposals a lot more effectively than is the case at the moment, and I say to the member that the Labour Party has put that on the record many times. I understand that members of MRAPP visited Parliament on 19 December to present 2,600 Christmas cards to the First Minister requesting that he take action to stop the Carnbroe incinerator. I hope that they have at least been granted the courtesy of a response. Of course, the Carnbroe incinerator is not an isolated occurrence. Another application for a waste-management facility near Shotts was approved by Scottish Government reporters on appeal, having initially been rejected by North Lanarkshire Council. I hope that the Scottish Government will ensure that respect for local democracy, whether it is exercised through local communities or local authorities, is a central part of the revised Scottish planning policy. I also urge that the quest to meet renewable energy targets and zero waste targets, however laudable, is not placed before the needs and desires of local residents.

I congratulate Jayne Baxter on making her maiden speech. I know how nerve-racking that is—as all members do—and I am sure that she is relieved that it is over. I look forward to hearing many more of her speeches. The sharp escalation in youth unemployment has been one of the most visible and vexing features of the recession. Although the overall UK unemployment rate has not exceeded its 1984 peak during the current recession, youth unemployment hit an historic high in 2009 and now stands at 21.1 per cent. As David Bell and David Blanchflower said, “workers of all ages are accepting lower skilled jobs than ... when the labour market was stronger, but” the “effect is strongest for those aged 16 to 24”. Whatever one’s age or credentials, scouring the market for jobs, submitting endless applications, attending countless interviews and absorbing constant rejections, is exhausting, stressful, discouraging and, for some, ultimately soul-destroying. That is the predicament in which many young jobless people find themselves. The effect of youth unemployment on future employment prospects and earnings is well documented, and the psychological impact on confidence and self-esteem should not be discounted. Research shows that young men who experience prolonged unemployment are three times more likely to suffer from depression and that high levels of youth unemployment have a detrimental social impact, leading to increased rates of crime, drug abuse and chronic ill health. It is only natural, therefore, that, as an MSP for Central Scotland, I have watched the rising claimant count among young people with a growing sense of trepidation. The most worrying factor is the incidence of long-term youth unemployment—16 to 24-year-olds who claim jobseekers allowance for more than one year—which has increased exponentially over the past four years. In North Lanarkshire, the rate of long-term youth unemployment rose by a staggering 3,367 per cent between March 2008 and March 2012. Although the upward trend has tapered slightly, the most recent data from the Office for National Statistics revealed that the number of 16 to 24-year-olds claiming jobseekers allowance for more than one year rose by 137 per cent in the past 12 months. As matters stand, there is nothing to suggest that the rate will fall to pre-recession levels. That will certainly not happen without decisive intervention from government at every level. I welcome the Scottish Government’s investment of £30 million and the additional £25 million in European structural funding to support youth employment initiatives. However, despite the Scottish Government’s financial commitments, there are areas in which it has been seriously remiss. One such area, as we note in the Labour amendment, is the funding of further education. As Scotland’s Colleges said in “Scotland’s Colleges: Shaping a Sustainable Model for a Successful Future”, the Scottish Government is consistently failing to “recognise the critical role colleges play in delivering ... a successful Scotland.” The 24 per cent real-terms cut to college funding between 2011 and 2015 has had and will continue to have a severe adverse impact on young people who rely on colleges to furnish them with the skills and qualifications to secure employment or progress to higher education. I join my Labour colleagues in urging Mike Russell to rethink this misguided policy with the greatest possible urgency. Careers advisory services have also been affected by Scottish Government cuts. John Swinney wrote in a recent letter to me: “the biggest impact in addressing the occupational choices of individuals comes through the provision of good careers advice.” I could not agree more. If young people are to progress into good careers and enjoy fulfilling lives, it is imperative that they are given the appropriate advice and guidance. I was disappointed, therefore, to learn that Skills Development Scotland has shifted the emphasis of careers advice from personalised interviews to a web-based service called my world of work. Although there is a place for an online advisory service, it is no substitute for one-on-one interviews that are tailored to individual requirements. Young people, especially those of school-leaving age, are not always receptive to advice or guidance about anything. At such an early age, it is difficult to appreciate the repercussions that decisions that are made now will have on later life.

I do not agree with that intervention, as the paragraph that I was about to read out will show. The fact that only 17 per cent of young people in South Lanarkshire and 14 per cent in North Lanarkshire have registered for my world of work shows that the message is not getting across to the young people who need that service now. I understand that delivering effective careers advice is not straightforward. It requires considerable knowledge and expertise. The Scottish Government's youth employment strategy highlights the contribution that is made by the voluntary and third sector in supplying the advice and guidance to help young people to find work. Last November, I visited the Motherwell office of Rathbone, a voluntary youth sector organisation with over 30 years’ experience of helping young people to find work. Rathbone focuses on disadvantaged communities and tailors its programmes to suit the needs of the individual and the local economy. The employees I spoke to exhibited great knowledge, enthusiasm and commitment to their work. I was therefore disappointed to learn that, between April and November 2012, Rathbone received fewer referrals from Skills Development Scotland than it did in the same period in 2011. Given that youth unemployment rose substantially over that period, I find that detail perplexing. Let us be clear: scrimping on college funding and careers advisory services will solve neither the economic nor the youth unemployment crisis. If the Scottish Government requires guidance, it should follow the examples that are being set by local councils. Falkirk Council deserves particular praise. Through its backing Falkirk’s future initiative, it has collaborated with local employers to secure work experience and employment opportunities for young people. Thanks to such initiatives, Falkirk has performed robustly against the generally gloomy outlook. Last September, it achieved a two-year low in overall unemployment, and a year-on-year reduction in the number of 18 to 24-year-olds who are claiming jobseekers allowance. We are all aware that youth unemployment is a difficult and intractable problem. With that in mind, I hope that the Scottish Government will take this speech and Labour's amendment in the collaborative spirit of the all-Government, all-Scotland approach, and act in the best interests of Scotland's young people.

3. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met representatives of NHS Lanarkshire and what issues were discussed. (S4O-01620)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer. Can he tell me on what date he, or officials acting at his direction, last contacted NHS Lanarkshire regarding the modernisation of mental health services in Lanarkshire?

Given the content of the Welfare Reform Bill, we should not have been surprised by the UK Government’s announcement in March of its intention to shut four of Scotland’s nine Remploy factories. Esther McVey, the disabilities minister, has since confirmed that Government funding for Remploy will be withdrawn altogether by 2014-15. Since taking office, the coalition Government has made abundantly clear where the disabled and disadvantaged rank on its list of priorities. Not content with deploying rigid and callous capability assessments to persecute the seriously ill and disabled who are unable to work, it has begun to persecute disabled people who are able to work. Iain Duncan Smith likes to cultivate an image of people who are out of work or on benefits as being lazy. He recently spoke scathingly of a “culture of entrenched worklessness and dependency”, and said that the benefits system should be a safety net and not a lifestyle choice. However, his Government is depriving hard-working individuals of any choice, by forcing them out of work and on to benefits. How does it justify that?

I am grateful for that intervention because to equate what Peter Hain and the Labour Government were trying to do to modernise the service with what is happening now and the shutting of the service—they are completely different and without parallel—shows the extent of the member’s argument. As with everything else, money is the overriding imperative. Apparently Remploy factories are loss making, but if the Conservatives and their Lib Dem vassals were really so worried about systems that lose money, they would turn their attention to the tax loopholes that allow wealthy individuals to hoover up prime real estate without paying any stamp duty or land registry tax. If, after that, they were still short of money, they could always send the bailiffs round to Starbucks. Of course, they will not do that because they have discovered, as have many before them, that it is far easier to pick on the poor and the vulnerable than the wealthy and the powerful—[Interruption.] Did Mr Fraser want to intervene?

Absolutely. Every time that there is a question, the Conservatives have to go back to their defence of “What did you do when you were in power?” [Interruption.]

Thank you. Blaming it on someone else is just not good enough for the people who are asking for their jobs now and who are in the gallery this afternoon. It is not good enough, Murdo Fraser. That is why the coalition continues to attack the public sector and the welfare state, and why it has turned its fire on Remploy, an institution that has served disabled people in this country since 1945, the year of the inception of the welfare state. What parallels could we draw between the compassion of the post-war Labour Government and the callousness of the car-crash coalition? However, I do not wish to embarrass members on the Tory benches—although I think that they are doing that perfectly well themselves. In stark contrast to Mr Duncan Smith’s distortions, the 101 disabled workers at the four Remploy factories that are earmarked for closure do not want to be “dependent or disenfranchised”. As one former worker at Remploy’s recently closed factory in Netherton, North Lanarkshire, put it: “None of us want to lie at home on benefits. We want to be out there working. There are already millions of people unemployed. What chance have we got?” She was right to be pessimistic: the record of the Government’s access to work programme is shocking. As my Labour colleagues at Westminster have already pointed out, for all the promises that former Remploy workers would be assisted to find new work, only 3 per cent of those who have been made redundant have found jobs. Here is the brutal reality of that statistic: to date, 31 factories have closed, 1,061 jobs have been lost and only 35 disabled workers have found new work. That constitutes damning evidence that the coalition Government’s £8 million package to support workers who have been made redundant is woefully insufficient. For Remploy workers in Scotland, where the unemployment rate is already above the UK average, the landscape is particularly bleak, especially for disabled women, who, according to evidence presented to the Equal Opportunities Committee, are doubly disadvantaged in the labour market. In light of those facts, I fully support my Labour colleagues at Westminster, along with the Scottish Government, in urging the coalition Government to postpone stage 2 of the closures pending a full and independent review of stage 1. In the meantime, this Parliament has a responsibility to protect Remploy factories and other sheltered workplaces throughout Scotland. I agree that the coalition Government should communicate its intentions to its Scottish Government counterparts in a timely manner to ensure that, in the event of further redundancies, employment advice is available and accessible at the point of need. However, that alone is not enough. Given the reports that I have heard about the services offered by Skills Development Scotland and partnership action for continuing employment to workers made redundant by the Philips factory in Hamilton, I do not have great confidence in the ability of either organisation to provide the tailored support needed in this instance. If we are to help disabled Remploy employees back to work, we must do more than merely ensure that SDS and PACE are on hand to give advice about CVs. What other options are available to us? During the stage 1 debate on the Welfare Reform (Further Provision) (Scotland) Bill in May, I urged the Scottish Government to follow the Welsh Assembly’s lead and conduct modelling to assess the impact of the act. Once again, the Welsh Assembly has set an instructive example, introducing an employer support grant to help secure employment for disabled former Remploy workers. The grant, which will cost in the region of £2.4 million a year, will subsidise wages for former Remploy employees and contribute towards additional costs incurred by participating companies. The grant will also be available to local authorities offering sheltered or otherwise suitable employment to Remploy workers for a minimum of four years. I hope that the Scottish Government will offer a similar incentive to prospective employers. I look forward to further information from the minister after the Christmas recess. In addition to that, a great deal more could and should be done to ensure that sheltered employers have fair access to public sector procurement contracts. The Scottish Government’s public sector procurement bill presents a perfect opportunity to achieve that. According to the consultation brief, the bill as it stands aims to promote “clear, wide and consistent ... application” of rules governing public procurement. It also aims to facilitate easier access to public contract opportunities for small and medium enterprises and the third sector. I believe that measures to assist Remploy and other sheltered employers to win public sector contracts would fit comfortably within those parameters. I believe—as I have always believed—that it is the duty of politicians to show compassion and support for the vulnerable and disadvantaged, especially in times of adversity. It is in that spirit that I call upon members of this Parliament to work together to offer practical and constructive help to all those who are affected by the Remploy closures.

While we await the appointment of a new chair, the cabinet secretary has recently intervened in provision of mental health services by NHS Lanarkshire. Does he intend to intervene on reviews of acute services in all areas prior to those reviews being considered by the relevant health boards and, of course, before crucial appointments are made?

I, too, welcome Humza Yousaf to his post. I hope that, like me, he will still be smiling at half past nine this evening. In 1841, David Livingstone—Scotsman, missionary, doctor and philanthropist—travelled to central Africa. He went on to play a major role in improving the health and education of the indigenous population and freeing them from the scourge of slavery. Livingstone was both internationalist and philanthropist. Born in Blantyre to a working class family, he received his medical training in Glasgow and London and used his skills to improve life for people in a country thousands of miles from his own. His body now rests in Westminster Abbey, but his spirit endures in Africa. I was fortunate enough to visit Malawi this June in the company of pupils and teachers from St Andrew’s, St Margaret’s and Coatbridge high schools in North Lanarkshire. The trip was organised by Charles Fawcett of the North Lanarkshire healthy lifestyle project, as part of the girls go for health initiative. That initiative was established in 2009 as part of a formal partnership agreement between North Lanarkshire Council and the Forum for African Women Educationalists in Malawi. The primary aim of the agreement is to end the marginalisation of women in Malawian society by engaging with partner schools in Malawi to facilitate greater access for women to education and healthcare, and working to end harmful practices such as initiation ceremonies, female circumcision and early marriages. It therefore continues a proud tradition of Scottish involvement in the health and education systems in Malawi, which is as vital now as it was in Livingstone’s time. Although the prevalence of AIDS is well documented, malnutrition remains the single biggest killer and, as in most third-world countries, women and children are the disproportionate victims of chronic poverty. In Malawi the status of women, and particularly girls, is fundamentally subordinate to that of their male counterparts. That inferiority manifests itself most visibly in health, education and the justice system. Although HIV and AIDS is a problem for the whole population, affecting 10,000 Malawians every year, 58 per cent of those infected are girls and women aged between 15 and 24, many of whom are forced into the sex trade. In more rural areas, the incidence of HIV and AIDS is six times higher among women than men. The discrimination that is experienced by women is deeply ingrained in Malawian culture. Until the early 1960s, Malawian girls were not allowed to attend school. Today, female education is still viewed by many as irrelevant. Far fewer girls than boys complete primary education and female literacy levels are substantially inferior to male. Put simply, many Malawians see no value in female education. Women’s role is largely confined to traditional domestic duties such as cooking and tending crops. Scottish-funded projects like the mother groups and the girls go for health initiative have been working hard to cultivate a more enlightened view of women and their role in society. The mother groups encourage more women to attend school, and the girls go for health initiative strives to keep them there, providing them with hygiene and sanitary products, and financial aid for school fees and educational materials, and organising workshops to encourage male pupils to respect and value their female peers. Considering that many schools that I visited did not even have proper buildings or stationery, such assistance is an invaluable means of helping girls to transcend the gender handicap. Another area in which women suffer disproportionately is the justice system. There were aspects of my visit to Malawi that I will always treasure—not for nothing is it called the warm heart of Africa—but they are countered by some dark and distressing experiences. The plight of women in one prison that we visited was particularly harrowing. Interred for no ostensible reason and for an undefined period—guilt and accusation being generally interchangeable, and the justice system being somewhat sluggish—more than 40 women and children were crammed into narrow and claustrophobic cells. They shared one toilet and a kitchen that consisted of a boiler encased by bricks. There they were left, abandoned and largely forgotten, to while away their days with little prospect of reprieve. No doubt they are there still. Last year, the North Lanarkshire healthy lifestyle project applied for Scottish Government funding for a project concerning the education and empowerment of female prisoners, which was to be centred on three prisons—Chichiri, Zomba and Mulanje. The programme aspires to provide legal advocacy to women who are accused of murder, and representation for those who are accused of lesser crimes. In addition, the programme will support the children of female prisoners—in and out of the prison system—and work to rehabilitate prisoners who are released back into the community. Despite the undoubted need for such a programme, the initial application was unsuccessful. Having seen the conditions of female prisoners in Malawi, like Maureen Watt, I urge the Scottish Government to strongly consider allocating funding in the next round of awards, to which the minister referred earlier. David Livingstone campaigned against the iniquity of slavery. The women in Malawi’s prison system live in terrible conditions with few rights and scant prospect of justice. Allocating money that would help to end that modern abuse of human rights would be a fitting way in which to mark Livingstone’s enduring legacy. I will end on a personal note. Since returning from Malawi, I have been asked on countless occasions whether I enjoyed my trip. The only way that I can answer that is by posing a few questions of my own. How could I not enjoy the sheer enthusiasm of all those whom we met in Malawi and their desire to learn about us, our language, our culture and our country? How could I not be inspired by the fact that all the young people whom we met seemed to be smiling? They smiled when they said hello, they smiled when they said goodbye and they smiled as they ran alongside our bus as we departed from their village. How could I not have enjoyed the generous hospitality that I experienced in the hotel where we stayed and in the many schools that we visited, as well as the dancing and, of course, the food? I forged many friendships, including with Velia, Jacqueline, George, Lackson and Hudson in Malawi, and with the staff and pupils with whom I travelled. Those young people were a testament to their parents, their school and, most important, their country. They gave up the chance to attend their school prom to go to Malawi to help others. They chose to continue the good work of David Livingstone, and I know that the Scottish Government will want to do the same.

I welcome the opportunity to speak in an important debate about an issue that I feel strongly about. Cars are supposed to make our lives easier; for the most part, they do. I, for one, could not get by without mine. However, there is nothing more tragic than when something that is supposed to improve life destroys life. Every car accident that results in serious injury or death is a travesty, especially when the accident is caused by dangerous driving. It is critical that we send out the message that driving that endangers the safety of other road users will not be tolerated. When a person gets behind the wheel under the influence of alcohol, drugs or any other substance that impairs reactions and judgment, they are putting themselves and, more important, others, at risk. Over the past half century, societal attitudes towards drink-driving have progressed significantly. The latest Scottish Government figures reveal that casualties resulting from drink-driving have fallen by 17 per cent since 1999. However, that still left 20 people dead in 2010 as a direct consequence of drink-driving, with a further 120 seriously injured. Against that backdrop, I welcome the proposal in the Scottish Government’s consultation paper to reduce the drink-driving limit from 80mg of alcohol per 100ml of blood to 50mg per 100ml, and to bring Scotland into line with the rest of Europe. Switzerland lowered its blood alcohol limit from 80mg to 50mg in 2005 and has seen drink-related road deaths fall by approximately 20 to 30 fatalities a year. The Westminster Parliamentary Advisory Council for Transport Safety predicted that lowering the UK limit to 50mg would significantly reduce fatalities, a position backed by legal expert Sir Peter North, who has also called for a reduction to 50mg. In a report commissioned by the previous UK Government, he estimated that that reduction could save up to 165 lives in the first year, and as many as 303 after six years. Sadly, however—against the advice of road safety charities and the British Medical Association and despite support from the Automobile Association and the RAC—Philip Hammond, the Conservative Secretary of State for Transport, rejected the findings of the North report, and opted to keep the current 80mg limit. If, as Mr Hammond asserted, while paradoxically deciding to retain the 80mg limit, drink-driving is socially unacceptable, why not render that impossible in practice? Even with the limit at 50mg ambiguity remains. Many people are confused about how much alcohol constitutes 80mg. We would be no more certain with the level set at 50mg.

Absolutely. Like others, I confess that I am one of those people who drink and drive, but not at the same time. The message not to consume any alcohol should be rolled out and people should be in a position to understand what that means. No one knows what one drink means. Drinking one alcopop is one unit; drinking a pint of cider is 2.4 units. Both are only one drink, and we must be clear on what that means and develop that point. That is further complicated by the fact that the effect of alcohol varies according to, as Mark McDonald said, gender, physique, constitution, fatigue and food consumption. What is safe for one person is not necessarily safe for another. We need to put an end to the dangerous and outdated perception of drink-driving as socially acceptable while leaving a necessary margin for error to allow for trace levels of alcohol in the blood stream, for the reasons that Lewis Macdonald highlighted earlier. Many of the additional measures recommended by the Scottish Government require the devolution of further powers, so why not focus on what we can achieve now? My colleague Richard Simpson has already discussed the innovative measures that other countries have adopted and we already have the legislative power to introduce. There are a number of other steps that we could take to reduce the incidence of drink-driving. We should certainly explore further restrictions on alcohol advertising, especially on football strips and in stadiums. A large number of fans drive to and from stadiums. They cannot buy alcohol in the stadium and, we hope, have not consumed any before entering, but they spend 90 minutes surrounded by various images and slogans that promote it. Sport sends out a positive message about the benefits of a healthy lifestyle, but that message is hopelessly polluted when it is mixed with alcohol. I have no doubt that the end of alcohol sponsorship of sport would have a beneficial effect on the level of drink-driving. I would also like there to be an increase in advertising warning of the dangers of alcohol consumption generally and drink-driving in particular. Over the past decade, there have been a number of high-impact campaigns accentuating the risks and consequences of drink-driving. I would be interested to learn whether the Scottish Government plans to launch or sponsor similar campaigns in the near future. Such campaigns are prevalent at Christmas but should recur throughout the year. In addition, we should emphasise the risk of driving the morning after a night of heavy drinking. Alice Granville, policy and research analyst at the Institute of Advanced Motorists, recently observed: “Many drivers who would not consider driving after a night in the pub fail to recognise the influence of alcohol on their body the next day, or simply choose to ignore its effects … Drivers need to take responsibility and use alternative means of transport after a heavy night drinking.” It is also important that we do not marginalise the dangers of drug-driving. Although research on the effects of drug consumption on driving skills is comparatively scarce, it is likely to have the same adverse impact on reactions and judgment. As the Labour amendment states, the Scottish Government must ensure that any measures that are taken are effectively enforced. That necessitates a significant police presence, especially on the roads. It is imperative that front-line police officers remain on the front line. It also demands a robust judicial system. Over the past year, I have been dealing with a tragic case involving the death of a man in an accident that was caused by a motorist who was found to be in possession of banned substances. I have seen the grief that the perpetrator caused and do not believe that the punishment that he received fitted the enormity of his crime. Driving while intoxicated is a reckless and selfish act; it must be punished to the full extent of the law. If we are to send a clear and unequivocal message, those who are found guilty of driving under the influence of drink or drugs must be made to face the consequences of their actions.

Will the member take an intervention?

3. To ask the Scottish Government how it supports access to further education for mature female students, disabled people and those from low-income backgrounds. (S4O-01368)

The draft budget equality statement acknowledges that unless the process of restructuring Scotland’s colleges is undertaken carefully, it may have a detrimental impact on the groups that I have highlighted. What assurances can the cabinet secretary give to those groups that their opportunities to attend college will not be vastly reduced, given that the draft budget reveals that the college, adult learning and further education budgets will be cut over the period of the spending review?

8. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met representatives of BBC Scotland and what issues were discussed. (S4O-01353)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer and for raising the issue of cuts. In an answer to Ken Macintosh, she said that in an independent Scotland viewers will be able to “enjoy more home-grown content, including a Scottish national broadcaster that will build on the existing staff and assets of BBC Scotland, while enjoying the same programmes and channels as they do now.”—[Official Report, 20 September 2012; c 11700.] Does that mean that the new independent broadcaster will purchase the existing BBC infrastructure and resources in Scotland? How does the Scottish Government propose to fund such a generous service?

I am pleased to take part in the debate and thank Linda Fabiani for securing it. She has given us the opportunity not only to discuss our experiences of breast cancer and highlight the challenges that people continue to face, but to thank the many people who work for breast cancer charities and organisations throughout Scotland. There will be a person in our constituencies who, at this very moment, is worried about a lump or a change in their breast. They will be awash with anxiety but they will be reluctant to take that all-important step and make an appointment with their doctor. It is for that person that I welcome tonight’s debate. I understand that sense of trepidation, as I am sure we all do, but it is always better to know the truth than to live in fear and doubt, especially where one’s health is concerned. It is for that person, and for the many other people around the United Kingdom who are affected by breast cancer every day, that I welcome Breakthrough Breast Cancer’s touch, look, check campaign. Like many others, I had the opportunity to attend a session with the Breakthrough team that recently visited the Parliament. I learned more about self-checking, particularly its importance in early diagnosis or simply as a means of alleviating doubt. The team does a fantastic job, and I hope that the crucial message that it promotes is beginning to reap rewards. I was especially attentive to what the Breakthrough team said about self-checking, especially as I had thought that I had all the information that I needed. Since I was a teenage girl, I have been trained in what to look for and have carried out regular checks on myself. Only last Christmas, my sister and I received a self-examination glove and information DVD from our mum. That was not the gift that I had asked for, and members can imagine the look on my face when I opened the somewhat curious present, but I can honestly say that it is the most important present that I have ever received. My mum was diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 33. At the time, I was only 10 and did not realise how life-changing that diagnosis would be. I did not understand the magnitude of a double mastectomy, radiotherapy, chemotherapy or reconstructive surgery; what I did understand was that it was a frightening experience that caused a lot of physical and emotional pain, not only to my mum, but to the rest of our family. Although that pain reduces over time, it never goes away. It is because of that that I believe that we need to offer more counselling to families and, in particular, children during such a traumatic time. I know that counselling services have moved on in the past 18 years, but there is always room for improvement. I also believe that we should make a concerted effort to increase awareness of male breast cancer. The incidence of breast cancer is far lower among men—around 300 men are diagnosed with breast cancer each year in the UK and around 25 in Scotland—but, whatever the figure, more attention must be paid to the men who are potentially at risk. I have already alluded to my mum’s case and, as we have heard, many other members have had similar experiences, but I did not mention that her father—my grandfather—was also diagnosed with, and indeed died from, breast cancer. Therefore—believe me—when I say that we need to do more to increase awareness, I am talking from bitter experience. My mother’s cancer is genetic, and although I realise that that is also rare, I know that my family is not alone. That is the message that we should be broadcasting to all those people who are affected by breast cancer: you are not alone. Help is always at hand. All you have to do is ask. That is the message of breast cancer awareness month, and it is why we must all keep supporting it.

I welcome today’s debate and thank everyone who took part in the recent women’s employment summit. I hope that the discussions at the summit will feed into the policy process and go some way towards addressing the employment problems that women in Scotland face and which the minister outlined in her speech. The professional and social landscape has changed significantly for women over recent decades. However, although many barriers have been broken down, many remain. The gender divide begins to assert itself at university, where the STEM subjects remain largely male dominated. Although the specific skills sets required by such subjects mean that the professional outcomes for graduates in those fields are generally positive, there is far greater representation of women in subjects with less technical and vocational aspects such as the arts and social sciences. As for the world of work, although the gender balance within professional occupations is roughly equal, the top managerial positions are still disproportionately male dominated. Even starker is the division of genders along occupational lines. For example, the skilled trades are 92 per cent male, while women comprise 80 per cent of the workforce in caring, leisure and service occupations, and a similar trend can be observed in the division between full-time and part-time work.

I am sorry—I cannot give way just now. Although with the rise in underemployment more men have taken up part-time work in recent years women are still vastly overrepresented in that area. The underlying reason for that is that in broad societal terms women remain the primary carers. As a consequence, what we might call the key transitional events of human life—marriage, the birth of children and the ageing and infirmity of parents—have a far greater social and professional impact on women than they have on men. There is a raft of new challenges to add to those traditional ones. The prince among them is Mr Osborne’s obsessive anti-state dogma, which has had a serious, if predictable, impact on a large proportion of women who are employed in Scotland’s public sector. As Ken Macintosh said, over the past year, there have been 30,000 public sector job losses in Scotland. That has directly contributed to the 16 per cent rise in female unemployment—the figure is 30 per cent among women aged 16 to 24. With 80 per cent of Cameron’s cuts still to come, many more jobs will go before the dust settles. Most worrying for female workers in Scotland is John Swinney’s refusal to admit responsibility for Scotland’s sclerotic economic recovery and high levels of unemployment. With further restrictions on finance, job losses are unavoidable, and many of the victims will be women. If that scenario is to be avoided, the Scottish Government needs to take real and decisive action to support and promote female employment from school leavers onwards. As a starting point, it must acknowledge that female unemployment is a specific problem that is influenced by a specific set of educational, professional and social factors. The fact that the Government has, so far, failed to do that is evidenced by its youth employment strategy. The strategy document, which is fulsome in its praise of modern apprenticeships and the opportunities for all programme, features no specific policies on narrowing the gender pay divide while addressing occupational segregation. It does not mention that modern apprenticeships reinforce existing norms of occupational segregation, with women constituting 97 per cent of new starts in early years and education in 2011-12 against only 3 per cent of new starts in engineering. Most worryingly, the document features no overarching strategy for addressing female employment in the long term.

I am sorry, but I have only a minute to go. The strategy document does not attempt to explain why women’s educational superiority in the early years is not translated into employment in later life or to draw the link between the lack of childcare support and the consequent difficulty that many women have in obtaining and maintaining full-time employment. Those are tough questions that must be answered. When I spoke in the debate on the national parenting strategy, I urged the Scottish Government to consider introducing an early childhood education and care system, as advocated by Children in Scotland in a submission to the European and External Relations Committee. That would not only create jobs, but give parents—primarily women—greater flexibility to pursue professional opportunities. If the Scottish Government is serious about solving Scotland’s female employment problems and is really committed to transforming Scotland into a Scandinavian-type social democracy, that is the type of system that it needs to implement.

There has been a concerted effort in both Scotland and the UK for a number of years to give care recipients greater power and influence over decisions that will have direct and tangible effects on their everyday lives. That effort has been accompanied by attempts at local and national levels to tailor individual care to personal specifications. The general principles of the bill—involvement, informed choice and collaboration—attempt to reconcile those two objectives in relation to social care. The bill’s aim is to ensure that service users are engaged partners as opposed to passive recipients in the commissioning and delivery of care. As a passionate advocate of independent living, I fully support that aim, but as the Health and Sport Committee’s report has already highlighted, there remain aspects of the bill that must be addressed. The bill in its current form promotes independent living, but I would like that to be strengthened by the inclusion of a statement of intent that would underpin our common right to live an independent life. To ensure that that right becomes a reality, we must continue to work towards integration of health and social care. That is an explicit Government aim, which the Labour Party supports, and that is why we have called for the creation of a national care service. We believe that that is the best route to achieving that aim, but it is not currently on the agenda. Therefore, we must focus on the other obstacles that we must overcome. The first and foremost of those obstacles is cost. We agree that, where possible, individuals who are currently cared for in hospital should be cared for in the community. The bill is part of the process, but the transition of care necessitates a transition of budget. Significant bridging finance is needed to shift the cultural balance from hospital to home-based care. At present, it seems to be doubtful that the bill will make adequate financial provision for the increased numbers of people who will receive care in their own homes, as is their right. That is precisely the sort of detail that we must have regard to if we are to ensure that the spirit of the bill is matched by its outcome. I would welcome any assurances that the Government can give me on that.

All the information should have been provided to the committee so that an informed choice could be made. I call on both sides to provide that information so that such a choice can be made. Statutory access to self-directed support is undoubtedly empowering, but it may also be intimidating. Individual care requirements will vary a great deal in their nature and complexity, so it is imperative that the available options be promoted clearly and consistently across local authority boundaries. That will enable individual service users to make informed choices and will help to ensure that a constantly high standard of care is maintained across the country. That is especially the case when it comes to direct payments. Taking sole responsibility for commissioning one’s own care is a daunting prospect. In many cases, it will entail the removal of the local authority as the traditional middleman in provision of care, but local authorities must remain part of the process, with a statutory obligation to ensure that the appropriate advice and support are available prior to the allocation of a direct payment. Service users who choose this path should have access to budget management training and must be made aware of their rights and responsibilities as employers. In addition, the bill must make provision for any incidental costs arising from direct payments. Capability Scotland cites examples of cases in which direct payments have been discontinued immediately upon the death or long-term hospitalisation of the recipient, which has left families being liable for redundancy payments that are owed to personal assistants. The bill must stipulate that the amount of the award is commensurate with the overall costs of care, including those that arise from sudden death or hospitalisation. Another matter of note is that the bill will, in effect, create a market in provision of care by placing local authorities and other service providers in direct competition. Some people have argued that many local authorities offer less in direct payments than the equivalent cost of arranged services, in an attempt to keep service provision in-house. As a consequence, it has been suggested that primary responsibility for setting the value of direct payments be passed to an independent arbiter. In addition, Capability Scotland has argued for the establishment of an independent statutory appeals process to allow for decisions on assessments of needs and the cost of care packages to be effectively challenged. That seems to be a sensible request. The formation of an independent appeals panel would offset the fears of many service users that their challenging of decisions through existing internal mechanisms will result in prejudicial treatment in the future. As self-directed support becomes more established, there is likely to be increased uptake of direct payments. Although that will be a positive development, it may lead to more use of personal assistants as opposed to service providers. In 2011, 39 per cent of direct payments involved use of personal assistants, with 34 per cent using service providers and 3 per cent using some combination of both. Personal assistants are not regulated and little is known about the PA workforce. In order to guarantee a consistent high level of care to service users, and to safeguard the PA workforce, the Scottish Government should, I believe, consider developing a register of all carers and personal assistants, as has been suggested by Barnardo’s Scotland. I was disappointed to hear the minister ruling that out in his opening speech. Inclusion on such a list should be made a precondition of funding, especially in the provision of care for children and young people. Finally, it is imperative that the provisions of the bill be implemented. There should be robust oversight to ensure local authority compliance because we cannot allow any party to fail in its obligations. There is too much dormant legislation on the statute book. Self-directed support must not be allowed to join the list.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what action it will take to ensure that young people across Scotland have access to the relevant information regarding the legal and practical definition of rape. (S4T-00018)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the recent survey by the Havens charity that suggested that one in 20 males between the ages of 18 and 25 would try to have sex with a sleeping person? In light of that and George Galloway’s ignorant and distasteful comments, and in line with the Scottish Government’s commitment to preventative action, will the cabinet secretary consider offering direct funding to individual rape crisis centres across Scotland, which would give them greater freedom to respond to local issues?

There was a commitment in the Scottish National Party’s 2011 manifesto to try to devolve housing benefit to Scotland. What progress has been made on that? Is that still a commitment, given that a recent discussion paper that has been issued says that that is no longer one of the Government’s six main priorities?

When I spoke in the stage 1 debate, I described the Welfare Reform Act 2012 as “a missile that is aimed at the heart of the welfare state”.—[Official Report, 23 May 2012; c 9240.] Judging by this week’s announcement, I think that that was putting it mildly. It seems that, when it comes to the poor, the disenfranchised and the voiceless in our society, the malign intent of Messrs Cameron and Osborne knows no bounds. While the Tories refuse to pass legislation that would close tax avoidance loopholes and are happy to reduce the top rate of tax, the disabled, the unemployed and those on low incomes are viewed as fair game. We should forget about compassionate conservatism; the Tories are the typical playground bullies, who pick on those who cannot defend themselves while cosying up to the big boys who run the tuck shop and scoff all the sweets. In recent weeks, the Equal Opportunities Committee has been conducting an inquiry into homelessness among young people. During the evidence sessions, the devastating consequences of the Welfare Reform Act 2012 for the prospects of homeless young people has been a recurring theme. A witness from one local authority stated: “Welfare reform is terrifying because of the impact that it will have on young people’s lives.” She said that, because of the cuts, “we will no longer be able to deliver some of the projects that have been really successful.”—[Official Report, Equal Opportunities Committee, 19 June 2012; c 557.] The really pernicious aspect of this legislation, apart from the impact that it will have on people’s lives, is that it caters to people’s worst instincts: it pits the badly off against the really badly off and the vulnerable against the desperate. Mr Cameron says that there is nothing compassionate about allowing people to live their lives on benefits. What he fails to mention is that, according to research by the Smith Institute, 95 per cent of those who accounted for the recent £1 billion rise in housing benefit are in work. What can we do in Scotland to offset the worst excesses of the Tory Government? I have already mentioned the inquiry that the Equal Opportunities Committee is conducting. I would like to say a little more about that, with specific reference to the community care grant, which is being devolved to Holyrood. One witness described the devolution of the grant as one of the rare positive measures in the Welfare Reform Act 2012. Therefore, it is imperative that we take advantage of the opportunity to make the grant more efficient and effective than it currently is. I have stated previously that crisis loans and care grants should be amalgamated, that the grant should be available to applicants when they receive the keys to their property and not seven weeks later, and that the application process should be clear and transparent. I have been contacted by a number of organisations with regard to the interim arrangements for the grant, which are being developed by the Scottish Government and the Department for Work and Pensions. Although there is support in principle for the creation of a national grant fund that specifically recognises the needs of young people who leave care, concerns have been raised that the proposed allocation of £25 million is completely insufficient to service demand, especially given the adverse economic climate. That could lead to the fund running dry before the end of the year and applicants being left in crisis. There are fears that, in order to avoid that scenario, the eligibility criteria will be tailored to the budget as opposed to vice versa, thus tightening the criteria rather than making them more flexible. The most important concern is that we ensure that the new scheme prioritises need and does not exclude those in receipt of other benefits. I would appreciate the cabinet secretary’s reassurance on those points, as would local authorities, charities and potential applicants. It would be immensely sad if we threw away the opportunity to reform the grant and ensure that it is fair, transparent and available to those who most need it. I close with a brief comment on the debate about subordinate legislation. Given the necessity of ensuring that people retain access to passported benefits, I understand the need to move swiftly. However, I am disappointed that SNP members chose to reject Labour’s stage 2 amendments that favoured the use of the affirmative procedure to allow the appropriate level of parliamentary scrutiny.

I am just closing. Sorry. As my colleague Jackie Bailie pointed out in the Welfare Reform Committee, there was an overwhelming desire for that among charities and other external organisations. The amendments were not party political. They were intended to ensure that the opinion of those on the front line was heeded and that the subordinate legislation was presented before Parliament and not slipped in by the back door. It is therefore a pity that the SNP members voted with the sole Tory on the committee to ensure that the amendments were blocked, and that the SNP continued to vote with the Tories today.

I hope for their sakes that those whom they represent do not suffer as a result.

The Welfare Reform Act 2012 is a missile that is aimed at the heart of the welfare system, with the potential to inflict extensive damage. As such, it is attuned to the general tenor of UK Government policies. To me, the debate represents what this Parliament and devolution stand for: the ability to do what is right by the people of Scotland. I feel a sense of fellowship with people in England, and because I recognise that we are strongest when we stand together and not apart, I deeply regret that they do not have similar recourse. A recent report from the Institute for Fiscal Studies states that the reforms that are planned for the next few years will “cost households an average of £160 in 2012-13, rising to £370 a year thereafter. Households with children and those in the lower part of the income distribution” will feel “the biggest impacts as a proportion of income.” Overall, tax and benefit changes enacted by the UK Government will “unwind the large increases in the generosity of the tax and benefit system towards low-income families with children under the previous Labour Government”. Perhaps a more appropriate word would be “rewind”, so intent is the coalition Government on taking us back in time. All that is before we consider the following: the impact on disabled people of the 20 per cent cut to the newly introduced personal independence payment, which will lead to thousands of disabled people losing their entitlement; the purely arbitrary cap on housing benefit, which will lead to many individuals and families not being able to secure suitable housing; and the countless complexities the act has created by transforming eligibility to passported benefits, which is likely to cause chaos and confusion on an unprecedented level and to trigger a wholesale run on advisory services.

The key words that I used were “arbitrary cap”, which means that the cap is being applied across the board, regardless of anyone’s circumstances. What is wrong is that the individual is not being taken into consideration. When I read through the potential consequences of the act, I find the mad rush to rip up the welfare statute book only to replace it with this sorry selection of ramshackle reforms truly astounding. We are therefore extremely fortunate that we have an opportunity to launch a counter-measure that will help us to evade, if not to avoid entirely, a portion of the damage that the act will inflict upon deprived and vulnerable people across Scotland. We cannot let this opportunity go to waste. We must seize it—indeed, we owe it to those who have no such option to do so. We must establish the extent of the damage and, in so doing, determine what we can do to offset it. Speaking in the welfare reform debate in December, I argued that devolution of the community care grant presented us with an opportunity to improve on what we have. I read the consultation responses, and they are generally in accordance with what I suggested. The community care grant and the crisis loan should be combined to create a single fund for housing provision. The eligibility criteria should be clear and concise, the application process should be transparent, there should be a rigorous appeals process, and applicants for grants should be able to apply prior to receiving notice of housing. I hope that the Government will continue to note those proposals. The bill primarily addresses the powers that are to be adopted by the Scottish Parliament as a result of the UK act, but the real detail will be in the subordinate legislation, which is yet to come. As the Welfare Reform Committee noted, the UK Government in general and the Department for Work and Pensions in particular have provided scant information on the practicalities of the act. That lack of detail has proved to be obstructive because it is difficult to plan for legislation or to seek to mitigate its effects without having full knowledge of those effects. The committee correctly stated that it is for the DWP to undertake a thorough and comprehensive review of the impact of the act on all UK regions and to make that information available to devolved and local governments. However, the continued absence of such a review—not, it must be said, for the want of asking—means that we must take matters into our own hands. As well as conducting its own modelling, the Scottish Government must co-ordinate with local authorities, independent think tanks and the third sector. That will help to establish the scale and nature of the act’s financial implications, and it will inform the work of the Welfare Reform Committee and the Scottish Government, as they attempt to find the appropriate legislative response. We must ensure that there is the widest possible scrutiny. That seems obvious to me, but when we read the evidence that was provided to the committee and the briefings that numerous charities and external organisations have provided for today’s debate, it quickly becomes apparent that the transparency of the legislative process is a matter of general concern. It is crucial that as many organisations as possible be invited to contribute to the legislative process and that all relevant legislation is presented for scrutiny by the Welfare Reform Committee. So far, this difficult process has been relatively consensual, and it should remain that way. I am therefore worried by the prospect of any aspect of the subordinate legislation from the bill being passed under the negative procedure, which allows for no parliamentary scrutiny and allows subordinate legislation to be progressed during recesses. Given the bill’s likely impact on the people of Scotland, I find it odd that the Government would even consider such action. Along with some members of the committee and most of those who gave evidence, I believe that the provisions of the bill that will come through subordinate legislation, the majority of which are likely to be significant, should be subject to affirmative procedure. The Scottish Government might say that such a move is unprecedented, but my response would be, “So is this bill.” The only way we can offset the damage that will be done by the Welfare Reform Act 2012 is by working together. The bill is a vital piece of legislation and it deserves—or, rather, demands—the scrutiny and approval of the whole Parliament, and not just the Executive. Governments are temporary, but Parliament, I hope, will be permanent. As such, any significant subordinate legislation should be placed before it.

Has Margaret Burgess read—as I have—the briefings from organisations that want affirmative procedure to be used? Does she agree with that view?

Developing a national parenting strategy that is coherent and relevant to families across Scotland is a laudable aim, but the motion is an extended exercise in stating the obvious. The Scottish Government is seeking the admiration of Parliament for aspiring to make Scotland “the best place in the world to grow up” and for having the foresight to canvass the views of 1,500 parents and carers. It flanks that with a series of humdrum observations, such as “all parents need support at times” and “parents and carers bringing up children in difficult circumstances may need additional support”. Given the overwhelming banality of those statements, I am relieved that the Government is taking the time to gather more informed opinion. Although the Government’s aim to make Scotland “the best place in the world to grow up” is an excellent example of Salmond’s much-cherished blue-sky thinking, we might want to begin by making Scotland the best place to grow up in the European Union or even in the UK. As my colleague Neil Bibby observed in a debate in March, the Labour Government of 1997 to 2010 made children and young people a top priority. The introduction of 3,500 sure start centres, which were targeted at the poorest areas, was listed by the Institute for Government as one of the most successful policies of the past 30 years. Sure start was predicated on empirical evidence that illustrated the importance to a child’s development of being talked and listened to, and being treated with patience, empathy and understanding. It was a genuine attempt to tackle the devastating correlation between the early experience of poverty and deprivation, and poor educational performance and life prospects.

No, thanks. Despite the coalition Government’s sad, if predictable, dismantling of it, sure start remains a shining example of the early years provision to which we should aspire. Unfortunately, the Scottish Government is lagging behind. On Monday, I attended an informal childcare conversation with parents at the Burnbank family centre in Hamilton, which was organised by Save the Children. For the parents I spoke to, flexibility is critical. As they pointed out, 600 hours of free nursery provision is no use if it is not available when parents need it. Flexibility is especially important to low-income families, who rely most on state childcare and are more likely to be engaged in professions with rigid working hours. To achieve that, we might look to Europe for inspiration. A recent submission from Children in Scotland to the Parliament’s European and External Relations Committee made a persuasive case for the formation of an early childhood education and care system that would be similar to those that we find in other European countries. The submission outlines how that would improve the prospects of young children while simultaneously tackling the problems of female and youth unemployment through increased flexibility for parents and demand in the childcare workforce. Combining high-quality, nurturing care with good early learning requires a skilled and qualified workforce. The European countries that have such a workforce have the best outcomes in terms of children’s happiness, health and wellbeing. That is what we should be aiming at. There are examples closer to home of what a good parenting strategy might consist of. Last September, North and South Lanarkshire councils, in conjunction with NHS Lanarkshire and other service providers, formulated a parenting strategy. It includes a range of core commitments that are aligned to benefits and outcomes that are designed to provide support and guidance to local parents and care providers. It also offers a range of innovations for future consideration. For example, it stresses the importance of engaging with male parents and carers as early as possible, and encourages them to have a positive and active role in their child’s life. It also recommends the signposting of locally arranged activities such as parent and toddler groups, parent and teacher meetings and parent support groups. Those encompass the whole parenting spectrum, from prenatal classes to managing teenage behaviour. As many members will know far better than I do, parenting is a lifelong vocation. Those are just a few ideas for how we can enhance childcare in Scotland. We must concentrate on getting it right for Scotland’s parents and carers. In doing so, we can help to give our children the best possible start in life which, I believe, is the most that any Government can offer.

Before I make my speech, it would be remiss of me if I did not mention those who are on strike this morning in the Public and Commercial Services Union. I wish them all the best for their campaign and for today as they picket Parliament in the rain. The Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Bill, which will constitute the greatest upheaval to police and fire services in Scotland for more than 40 years, presents us with a delicate balancing act. On the one hand we have the requirement to save money, reduce duplication and increase efficiency. On the other hand, our ultimate responsibility as legislators is to ensure that any public sector reform has the interests of the people at its heart. To sacrifice the latter for the former would be to fall victim to the same misconception that drives policy south of the border. Quality must always come before cost. Several aspects of the bill are of concern to me. The first is the predicted timescale for the bill. Any fundamental reform to public services should not be entered into lightly regardless of the benefits that might accrue. I am concerned that police chiefs giving evidence to the Justice Committee have already expressed doubt about their ability to implement the changes effectively in the current timeframe. To amalgamate eight police services and eight fire services in less than a year is an enormous undertaking. Throw in the suite of savings, efficiencies and enhancements that the bill purports to make, and the problems begin to look insurmountable. A major proportion of the projected cost savings in the police are to be made through staff reductions. To achieve that, the new force must shed 1,100 staff by 2013-14. Assuming that the bill is agreed to before the summer recess, with the new force scheduled to begin operating in April 2013, there is a very narrow timeframe within which to make the necessary redundancies. To compound that, we have yet to establish whether the target of more than 1,100 is even attainable. The limit on compulsory redundancies means that we will have to rely on voluntary redundancies and, in the current financial climate, it is doubtful that a sufficient number of people will wish to leave the police force. Even if that were to be achieved, due process will require a prolonged period of negotiation in order to draw up fair, legal and transparent terms of severance. As a result, it seems unwise to adhere to any specific timeframe for achieving the necessary reductions. With every month that passes beyond the current schedule, more funds will be expended and less money saved. I am sure that, like me, members will have received letters and e-mails from Unison members about the bill’s proposals. In line with its commitment to improving the quality and scope of policing, one of the Scottish Government’s flagship pledges is that there will be no reduction in front-line staff. Over the past few years, many individuals and organisations have expressed doubt about the veracity of the Scottish National Party’s claim of 1,000 new police officers on Scotland’s streets. I do not want to detract from the recent achievements of the Scottish police, but it has been suggested that a substantial proportion of those officers are performing back-office tasks in lieu of having a general reduction in support staff. There is no point in ring fencing funding for front-line police officers and then consigning them to back-office functions.

The unions and those who work in the positions have told us that those are the facts. We need to weigh their remarks and whether they are wrong against the evidence of one person. Equally, it is unfair and inaccurate to view support staff as being in some way inferior to those on the front line. Indeed, labelling a workforce that covers everyone from administrative workers to information technology and communications staff as “back office” does those people an immense disservice. Front-line police depend on support staff to function effectively; neither is easily dispensable and both are not interchangeable. Indeed, a chief superintendent told the Justice Committee that any changes to staff ratios that occur under this bill must strike “the right balance between police officers and police staff—the right people with the right skills ... doing the right jobs”—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 28 February 2012; c 972.] and concluded that that would present a very “significant challenge”. We need to strike the correct balance not only between cost and quality and between front-line officers and support staff but also between integration and accountability. Rolling eight police and fire services into one raises the obvious risk of creating an overcentralised hierarchy and it is imperative that, in attempting to achieve savings through the centralisation of resources, we do not rupture the bonds between the police and local communities. Under existing arrangements, funding for the eight police forces comes from a variety of sources, with local authorities directly providing a substantial amount. Such an approach not only allows for VAT savings in the region of £20 million but creates a direct link between local funding and local services. As funding for the single police force will come from a single block grant provided by central Government, it is not clear how that essential link will be maintained. The Scottish Government has stated its belief that the new arrangements will enhance councillors’ influence on local police and fire services through their involvement in the strategic planning process, but the fact is that final accountability for the distribution and spending of money will always reside with the body that holds the purse strings. Given that the Scottish police authority will have ultimate responsibility, local councillors will have no authority over budgets and no oversight of the police in their area. It is difficult to envisage how such an arrangement will give councils greater influence; in fact, it might have an adverse effect on their ability to make long-term plans and set long-term objectives. Because of uncertainty about future funding levels, they will find it more difficult to tailor policies to local requirements. In highlighting these issues, I emphasise that the changes made under this bill must enhance the police and benefit local communities. Although I am confident that we can realise the bill’s goals of making savings while improving services, that will happen only if it is subjected to long and rigorous scrutiny that takes into account the views of all parties. We must ensure that the bonds between the police and local communities remain strong and that different authorities retain the flexibility to vary police strategies according to local need.

We all know that Scotland is blessed with some of the most spectacular scenery in the world. From the southern uplands to the Ochils, the Trossachs and the Cairngorms, it has landscapes both inspiring and dramatic. We are also a country with a rich artistic, historical and cultural heritage. Everyone has heard of Burns, Bruce, and Robert Louis Stevenson, while the character of Sherlock Holmes continues to invite imaginative reinterpretation in television and film. If all that fails to draw the crowds, there is always the whisky. Although all those things are rightly celebrated, Scotland’s tourism scene is far more diverse and disparate than is generally recognised. We must be careful to avoid becoming known, as my colleague Elaine Smith once memorably put it, as the country of “haggis, heather and highland flings”. Scotland has a lot more to offer tourists from home and abroad. I will draw attention to some of the tourist attractions in my region, Central Scotland. Some years ago, before Margaret Thatcher, North Lanarkshire was a hotbed of industry, home to an abundance of mines and iron and steelworks. For almost three centuries, heavy industry shaped the contours of our economic and social landscape, not only bringing jobs and prosperity, but providing a genuine sense of community and cohesion. Without wishing to romanticise what could be a brutal business, the loss of that sense of community and cohesion was perhaps the greatest tragedy of deindustrialisation. Although those times are gone, those who wish to explore North Lanarkshire’s industrial heritage can do so at the Summerlee museum in Coatbridge, a town once known as the industrial heartland of Scotland. The museum, which opened in 1987, is set in 22 acres and is based around the site of the 19th century Summerlee ironworks. It is undoubtedly the noisiest museum in Scotland: it features working machinery and a recreated draft mine. Visitors can take a guided tour of the mine and the miners’ cottages, which have renovated interiors that date from the 1840s to the 1960s. The tour gives visitors a flavour of industrial life at work and at home. The museum also boasts Scotland’s only operational tramway—it looks as though it will retain that claim indefinitely. It is sustained by continued investment from North Lanarkshire Council and Friends of Summerlee Heritage Trust, and admission to the site is free. To allow people to take maximum advantage of that, we should look at extending the opening hours. It is essential that Scotland’s tourism scene adapts to suit the changing needs of the modern working family. Parents who wish to take their children to museums and tourist attractions on weekday evenings should have the opportunity to do so. We already have a designated evening for late-night shopping. Why should the tourism industry not have something similar? Coatbridge’s annual St Patrick’s day festival, which began on 2 March, features an array of musical, sporting, artistic and cultural events. Some of those events are held during the day, some are held in the evening, and some are held at weekends. Such flexibility and choice give everybody the opportunity to sample the world’s eighth-largest St Patrick’s day festival. As an additional enticement, this year’s festival lecture affords a “rare opportunity to listen to celebrated politician, author, journalist and broadcaster, George Galloway present his view and experiences of Irishness in Scotland”. I am sure that all members would relish the opportunity to hear gorgeous George hold sway on Irishness. The tickets are only £3. It is important to remember that Scotland’s scenic attractions are not reserved to the Highlands and Islands. Drumpellier country park in North Lanarkshire is set in 500 acres of beautiful countryside and encompasses two lochs and an abundance of wildlife, and the artificial loch in Strathclyde country park, which spans the border of North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire, is a major centre for water sports. Strathclyde country park was a venue for last year’s international children’s games and is an official venue for the 2014 Commonwealth games. The park is also home to M&amp;Ds, which is Scotland’s biggest and best theme park. Lanarkshire also has many historical attractions. Chatelherault country park in Hamilton, which was designed in 1732 and was once the summer residence of the Duke of Hamilton, has been rated by VisitScotland as a five-star tourist attraction. Visitors to the park can revel in the elaborate splendours of the banquet hall or get lost in the expansive gardens. Low Parks museum, which is also rated as a five-star attraction, offers a fascinating insight into the many towns and villages in that part of the Clyde valley. It has entertaining and informative displays on the history of South Lanarkshire. Hamilton mausoleum, which was once the resting place of the dukes of Hamilton, offers tours of its ornate interiors for as little as £1.15 for adults and 70p for children. Bothwell castle, which dates from the 13th century, has been described by Dr Douglas Simpson, formerly of the University of Aberdeen, as “the grandest piece of secular architecture that the Middle Ages has bequeathed to us in Scotland”. No inventory of Central Scotland’s tourist attractions would be complete without mentioning the Falkirk wheel, which is now celebrating its 10th anniversary. It was completed in 2002 as part of the millennium link project to restore Scotland’s historic waterways, and it is the world’s first and only rotating boat lift. As well as being one of Scotland’s most popular tourism sites, it is listed as one of the top ten works of engineering genius by Lonely Planet. I finish by stressing that, although there is no doubt that Scotland has much to offer in respect of tourism, we must strive to ensure that all those sites—whether scenic, historic, recreational or cultural—are as accessible as possible. We must ensure that our public transport infrastructure can support those who do not own cars—that could be enveloped with a wider drive to make Scotland more accessible and competitive. The more we do to help to publicise the many attractions across Scotland, to make them more visible and more accessible, the more people will visit. It is essential that we remove barriers wherever possible and do not block legitimate attempts to enhance commercial opportunities. For example, I recently wrote to Transport Scotland on behalf of the Dakota hotel to request brown signage to make that hotel more visible to motorists. Unfortunately, Transport Scotland turned down that request. Increasing visibility will increase demand, which in turn will create additional jobs and greater prosperity, and lead to more money being spent and invested in local and national economies. The Scottish Government’s policy should be focused on increasing investment, enhancing infrastructure, and improving accessibility to give our tourism industry the best possible chance of success.

In the light of Angela Constance’s description of youth unemployment as “endemic”, does the First Minister agree with Skills Development Scotland’s decision to offer voluntary severance to about 150 members of staff, including 60 per cent of its key front-line workers in North Lanarkshire? Some 9.8 per cent of 16 to 24-year-olds in that area currently claim jobseekers allowance, a percentage that is well above the Scottish and UK averages.

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the annual arts festival that is organised by the youth arts and literary guild? In Airdrie this week, there has been a display of artwork produced by pupils in high schools throughout North Lanarkshire. Does she agree that such community-run festivals are a fantastic way of introducing young people to the concept of art galleries?

5. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body when the contract for the provision of catering services to the Parliament will next be up for renewal. (S4O-00695)

Will the SPCB assure me that, when the catering contract comes up—sooner rather than later, I hope—and is being renegotiated, staff numbers will not be reduced and that consideration will be given to paying the lowest-paid staff the living wage rate in order to ensure that they are on a level with other parliamentary staff?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive how many offences against Gypsy Travellers have been recorded in the last 12 months. (S4O-00669)

I hope that we can look at ways of recording such information in the future, because we do not have information about offences that have been taking place for a considerable time. Does the cabinet secretary agree that Gypsy Travellers remain at considerable risk of racially aggravated crime and that more needs to be done to protect them? He will be aware of the latest social attitudes survey, which indicates that 37 per cent of the population still hold prejudicial attitudes to Gypsy Travellers and that 92 per cent of young Gypsy Travellers experience some form of bullying because of their ethnic origin. We can infer from that that prejudicial attitudes to Gypsy Travellers are still prevalent. What action will the cabinet secretary take to offset that?

Young people are particularly vulnerable and impressionable. Their experiences in the formative period shape their perspectives and their prospects. Nowhere does that apply more than in the job market. Research has shown that experiencing unemployment at a young age increases the likelihood of unemployment in the future; that protracted spells of unemployment at a young age have an adverse impact on future earnings; and that entering the job market during a recession has a persistent negative effect on wages. The Scottish Government’s youth employment strategy contains some good suggestions and many fine words, but with Government strategy documents there is often a gap between the rhetoric and reality. When a strategy document is on firm ground, the language is concise and direct, but when it is not, the language is vague and repetitive. If we accept that youth unemployment is a crisis and that tackling it is a priority, it follows that we should concentrate our efforts where youth unemployment rates are highest. Figures for 2009-10 show that 22 per cent of college entrants—against just 7.6 per cent of entrants to elite universities—come from deprived communities. The strategy document’s “ambitious programme of post-16 education reform” contains a raft of proposals that are intended to increase college attendance, reduce the drop-out rate and leave college graduates better equipped for employment. I have no problem with those proposals. No one would argue against guaranteeing a place in learning for every 16 to 19-year-old who wants one. However, I wonder how colleges will enact the proposals while simultaneously absorbing a disproportionate cut to their budgets over the next three years. That is the gap between the rhetoric and reality. On a more positive note, the strategy alludes to current work programmes that are reaping dividends. During a recent visit to Hamilton Citizens Advice Bureau, I spoke to participants in the community jobs Scotland scheme. The visit was interesting and instructive. The employees were enjoying their work at Hamilton CAB and were gaining valuable skills and experience, but they expressed some misgivings about the scheme. They felt that potential participants should not be required to be out of work for six months before they could apply to the scheme and that a six-month wait between placements is too long. They believe that in order to improve the scheme, gaps between placements should be reduced and that provision should be made to extend placements, when that is appropriate. I hope that the minister will take on board those proposals. Several other schemes and initiatives that are operating in Central Scotland are worthy of mention. Many of them are funded and administered by local councils. Falkirk Council has supported 325 modern apprenticeships in the past year, which exceeds its target of 300. The backing Falkirk’s future initiative, whereby local businesses agree to employ at least one young person on a year’s contract, has been hugely successful, with almost 300 local businesses signing up. In addition, the council’s get ready for work contract is performing at 44 per cent above the Scottish average. As a result of those initiatives and others, the number of school leavers who are unemployed and seeking work in the Falkirk area is at its lowest level since 2002; Falkirk has the highest rate in Scotland of school leavers who are engaged in training, at 7 per cent above the Scottish average; and unemployment among 16 to 19-year-olds has decreased by 13 per cent since December 2010, while the Scottish average has increased by 4.6 per cent. I mention the achievements of Charmaine Hogg, a childcare modern apprentice in Falkirk, who overcame a number of barriers as a care leaver and recently won the service apprentice of the year award at the Scottish modern apprenticeship awards. Elsewhere in Central Scotland, North Lanarkshire Council recently announced plans to invest an extra £15 million in North Lanarkshire’s working—an employment and training service for local unemployed people. The council hopes that the extra funding will help 5,000 people back into work over the next three years, as my colleague John Pentland said earlier. As 7,000 young people in North Lanarkshire are unemployed, that would be a significant achievement. South Lanarkshire Council’s youth jobs fund has secured employment for more than 400 young people since 2009 by offering a wage subsidy to incentivise local employers. I am sure that Parliament joins me in welcoming the news—which Christina McKelvie forgot to mention when she was not making party-political points—that the council is investing an extra £1.2 million in its jobs fund between now and March. The 80 additional jobs that that will create will be targeted at two groups—those without a job who are aged between 18 and 24 and those who are aged 25 or over and who live in a household in which more than one person is out of work. Through such local initiatives, Falkirk, North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire Councils have displayed their commitment to tackling youth unemployment. I will close by mentioning the plight of a group of people whom the strategy does not mention. I recently visited the HOPE for Autism centre in Airdrie, where the centre’s manager described the problems that autistic people experience after they leave school. Given the chance, autistic people can work with concentration and efficiency, but they are being let down by a chronic lack of opportunity. There is a pronounced lack of support and provision for them beyond school-leaving age. That situation has existed for some time and is simply unacceptable. A youth unemployment strategy must be comprehensive. It must give opportunities to everyone, and it must leave no one behind. I hope that the Government will invest more funds in schemes that have a proven track record, and that it will make provision for those, including autistic people, who have been omitted from the current document.

18. To ask the Scottish Executive when the national steering group on advocacy support for children and young people last met and what issues were discussed. (S4O-00626)

The recently published consultation on improving advocacy for children and young people, which the minister referred to, is causing confusion in organisations that provide an independent advocacy service because of its failure to enshrine current principles into the new proposed principles and minimum standards. Will the minister give me an assurance that the current principles will be enshrined into the new principles and minimum standards? I look forward to meeting her on 2 February to discuss the issue further.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak in the debate, which is the first of its kind to take place in the Scottish Parliament, and I thank Stewart Maxwell for facilitating it. I also thank the Holocaust Educational Trust, which works with schools, colleges and communities across the United Kingdom to ensure that the memory of the Holocaust is preserved. Not only did the Holocaust destroy lives; it redirected the tides of history. The traditional Jewish communities of eastern and central Europe were swept away and, after much suffering, their remnants were washed ashore in Israel, America and, in some cases, the UK. For 6 million Jews, the Holocaust marked the end of the story; for countless others, it marked the beginning of a radically altered destiny. Although the legacy of the Holocaust persists, it continues to elude understanding and interpretation. Why should so much hatred and violence have been directed against a single religion and culture? What caused a prejudice and intolerance that had existed for many centuries to descend into genocide on such a grand scale? So horrific were the events of the Holocaust, and so far beyond the bounds of normal human experience, that many people lack the imaginative sympathy to make sense of them. Time and distance play a part in that—the further removed the events of the Holocaust, and the fewer the survivors, the more difficult it will be to keep alive its memory. That is why we must support the work of organisations such as the Holocaust Educational Trust. Time and distance influence our perception of history, but so does place. The physical and human landscape can be incredibly evocative; it can awaken memories and encourage understanding and empathy. Since 1999, more than 14,000 students and teachers have visited Auschwitz-Birkenau as part of the Holocaust Educational Trust’s lessons from Auschwitz project. I have not had the opportunity to visit Auschwitz, but it is clear to me from the testimony of those who have—such as the two student ambassadors, Dominic Bradley and Katie McKenna, who addressed the Parliament so eloquently at last week’s time for reflection—that it is an informative and profoundly moving experience. When he recalled his visit to Auschwitz, Dominic described the effect of seeing the photographs that were taken of prisoners shortly after their arrival at the camp. Many were smiling. To smile in the face of a camera is an instinctive response for some people but, as Dominic said, the smiles could also be interpreted as a defiant expression of self-worth. A darker truth is that the smiles signified the prisoners’ ignorance of what awaited them. It is difficult and distressing to imagine their dawning realisation of that, just as it is distressing to imagine their eventual fate. However, although such speculation is disturbing, we must remember that imagination is the key to understanding, and understanding the key to the empathy that lies at the core of our humanity. Katie McKenna, the other student ambassador at time for reflection, quoted a survivor who said that we must never allow ourselves to become indifferent to the suffering of others. In many ways, indifference is the worst of human sentiments. To be indifferent is to be callous, uncaring and uninterested. It signifies a lack of curiosity about other people and a supine acceptance of events. I am pleased, therefore, that the theme of this year’s Holocaust memorial day—“Speak up, speak out”—is an outright attack on indifference. The need to attack indifference is well known in Scotland, where sectarianism remains a problem. Further evidence of the need to speak out, if such evidence were needed, comes in the shape of the recent revelations about the Nazi drinking games in which students from the London School of Economics and Political Science indulged during a skiing trip. That privileged, well-educated individuals descended to such depths is one thing; that they reacted to a Jewish student’s objections with taunts and violence is quite another. The student in question recounted how, as the game escalated, he felt that he could no longer allow the jibes to continue. He is reported as saying: “The comments built up to the point where I couldn’t forgive myself if I let it slide.” He was bombarded with abuse and given a broken nose for his trouble. Speaking up and speaking out is not always easy. I have often heard people justify racist or intolerant remarks by saying, “It’s just a joke. I didn’t really mean it.” Such short-sightedness is ill advised and inexcusable. It is unfortunate that the gap between the everyday and the unspeakable is not as wide as many of us think it is. In his memoir, “The Single Light”, Ernest Levy, a Holocaust survivor who settled in Giffnock and Clarkston in East Renfrewshire, wrote: “Although in some respects we have advanced ... the lessons of the past are yet to be learned; namely, that prejudice, intolerance and sustained animosity can lead to persecution, murder then to mass-murder, which so quickly degenerates into genocide.” If we are truly to learn the lessons of the past, we must unite in opposition to hatred and discrimination in all their guises.

I believe that the welfare system should be based on four pillars: respect for human rights, dignity, compassion and trust. I have studied the details of the Welfare Reform Bill and read the policy memorandums and briefings from the charitable and voluntary sectors. I am sure that my fellow members have done likewise. The more I read about the bill and the more I consider its implications, the more convinced I become that it represents a huge backwards step for British society. I am alarmed and dismayed at the impact that it will have on the ill, the disabled and those who receive social housing benefit. Back when he was peddling his detoxification agenda, David Cameron claimed that the Tories were committed to creating a compassionate society. When the financial crisis struck, he said: “We are all in this together”. As Jackie Baillie said, we may all be in it, but as the coalition Government has since made clear, some are more in it than others. David Cameron tells us that 2012 will be the harshest year yet. There will be deep public expenditure cuts, an attack on pensions and a freeze on pay in the public and private sectors. The coalition Government tells us that we are broke and that there is no alternative to cutting benefits for the sick, the disabled and those who are in low-cost social housing. Such individuals will not be given a choice; there will be no leeway for negotiating comfy deals and cosy settlements. The Tory-led coalition, in outlining its plans to replace the disability living allowance with the personal independence payment, talks of creating a welfare system that is affordable and sustainable. It may be affordable and sustainable for the coalition, but it will not be for the many disabled people who will be plunged into poverty because of the Government’s determination—as Bob Doris has just said—to cut disability living allowance by 20 per cent. Across the welfare state, those new checks and balances will operate as a process of exclusion. The 20 per cent cut to disability living allowance will not be achieved without a significant cut in claimants. Given that there are already more disabled people in the UK than are currently claiming benefits, that is very worrying indeed. The Government hopes to save £1.45 billion of annual disability living allowance expenditure by 2014-15. To put that figure in context, the Scottish campaign on welfare reform states: “annual expenditure on all those currently in receipt of lowest rate care ... is approximately £900m.” In order to reach the target figure, all those people would have to lose their care, along with a significant number of those on higher rates. Tellingly, the personal independence payment makes no allowance for those who are currently on the lower rate of care. In Scotland, it has been estimated that in order to reduce disability living allowance by 20 per cent, one fifth of the current 340,510 claimants will lose their entitlement in its entirety. That is 68,000 people, which amounts to a combined annual loss of benefits of £260 million. Moreover, if the new assessment tests are restricted to those of working age, a staggering one in three disabled people aged between 16 and 65 will lose all his or her current entitlement. I listened carefully to what Liam McArthur said about the work assessments, and what went through my head was that there are cancer patients receiving treatment at this very moment who are going through work assessments. How can that be justified? There is no justification for it.

I understand that there is a review, but the measure should not have been there in the first place. It is not a case of simply weeding out the tiny minority who are making fraudulent claims—a figure that is estimated, despite the Government’s pernicious rhetoric, at just 1 per cent. The decision as to who receives the payment will be based on money and not merit. Last night, I was proud to lead a members’ debate on UK disability history month. I spoke about the theme for this year’s month, which is celebrating our struggle for equality. The struggle for equality continues, but it is shameful that the struggle is now with our own UK Government. I am pleased to note that the coalition Government has seen sense in at least one area. On 1 December, Maria Miller, the UK Minister for Disabled People, announced that proposals to remove disability benefits from those who are living in residential care have been scrapped. However, although I welcome that concession, which would have led to 80,000 disabled people losing between £20 and £50 per week, it does not go nearly far enough. Under the bill, the community care grant will be devolved to Scotland. The housing charity Barnardo’s has identified a number of issues with the way in which the grant is currently being administered. In its current form, the grant is a crisis loan that helps vulnerable people with the costs of independent living by providing additional funding for a range of household amenities. During the housing debate in October, I asked the Government to commit to restructuring the care grant by ensuring that the application process is made fairer and more transparent, and that it is applied consistently throughout Scotland in order to avoid a postcode lottery. I also asked the Government to guarantee that applicants will be given help with the forms in order to ensure that they are not unnecessarily rejected, and that the awards that are allocated will be sufficient to allow recipients to furnish their homes properly. Alex Neil, the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, promised to look seriously at those suggestions to see whether the Government could take them forward. I appreciated the cabinet secretary’s willingness to engage on the issue, and would be extremely grateful if an update could be provided. On Monday, I visited a school in my area. On the wall in the reception area, the school’s philosophy is displayed for all to see. It says: “Values are not just words; values are what we live by. They are about the causes we champion and the people we fight for.” Those are the words of Senator John Kerry. We in Scottish Labour live by the values of fairness and equality; we champion social justice, and fight for the rights of the vulnerable and disenfranchised. The bill constitutes a vicious and unprecedented attack on the welfare state, and we on this side of the chamber cannot and will not accept that.

It is an honour and privilege to host the first Scottish Parliament members’ business debate on United Kingdom disability history month. I will start by saying a few words about disability history month, which has only just entered its second year. In 2009, several organisations and charities that represent disabled people were commissioned by the Department for Children, Schools and Families to conduct research into the possibility of having a disability history week in schools. The research found overwhelming support for the idea, so it was suggested that the week be extended to a month, to be held every year between 22 November and 22 December. Disability history month aims to bring together disparate organisations including educational establishments, voluntary organisations, employers, local authorities and national Government to allow them to collaborate to facilitate events, organise campaigns and arrange speakers and materials. The idea is to provide a forum in which issues that are of relevance to disabled people and groups can be debated, discussed and publicised. The key purpose is to raise awareness of the unequal position of disabled people in society and to examine the roots of that inequality by highlighting disabled people’s historical and contemporary struggles for acceptance and inclusion. This year, the theme of the month is “celebrating our struggle for equality”. When I came to write my speech, I was struck by two points. The first was that whenever we discuss issues that relate to inequality and prejudice, the temptation is always to be negative and to dwell on defeats as opposed to victories, and on the past rather than on the future. I do not wish to be negative, partly because this year’s theme includes the word “celebrating” and also because, whether in the service of religion, gender, disability or race, the struggle against adversity is always bittersweet. It is bitter because it reminds us of a collective propensity for fear, discrimination and prejudice, and it is sweet because it reminds us of the unbreakable strength of the human spirit and our refusal to lie down in the face of injustice. I will celebrate that determination and strength, which brings me to my second point. Some of history’s most famous personages have been disabled, but not enough time has been devoted to the willpower and courage that it takes to surmount such difficulties. What do Socrates, Pythagoras and Charles Dickens have in common? All three were epileptic, as were Agatha Christie and Richard Burton. John Milton—arguably Britain’s greatest poet—was completely without sight when he wrote his famous masterpiece “Paradise Lost”. British percussionist Evelyn Glennie has been deaf since the age of 12, and Beethoven wrote some of his most famous works while suffering from tinnitus—a condition that eventually rendered him completely deaf. Franklin Roosevelt—architect of the new deal, and the man responsible for steering Americans through the second world war—contracted polio in 1926 and was paralysed from the waist down for much of his presidency. Actor Rowan Atkinson suffers from a speech impediment, and the late television presenter Jeremy Beadle was the first person to appear on national television with a visible physical disability. Finally, Alison Lapper has forged a remarkable career as an artist, despite being born without arms. That is just a small selection of individuals who have shown great courage in the face of adversity. They and others like them serve as examples to us all. However, there are many other individuals whose achievements are equally inspiring, although they are perhaps less well known. Born in 1939, Edward Verne Roberts was the first individual with severe disabilities to attend the University of California at Berkeley. A man of great determination and charisma, Roberts faced up to his fears while still at school and worked hard to generate a positive self-image. He overcame the objections of Berkeley’s administrators—one of whom reportedly commented, “We’ve tried cripples before and it didn’t work”— to enrol in 1962. He earned a BA in 1964 and an MA in 1966. Roberts’s example inspired many others to enter the university through the Cowell residence programme. Roberts formulated a political analysis that interpreted his disability in a positive light, and he attracted a group of like-minded followers who named themselves the Rolling Quads. The group was instrumental in the creation of the physically disabled students programme. Roberts later returned to Berkeley to head the Center for Independent Living, which caters for the needs of disabled people in the wider community. He was a pioneering and courageous leader, who is now often referred to as the father of the disability rights movement. Christy Brown was born with cerebral palsy into a working-class family in Dublin in 1932. Despite pressure to place him in a convalescent hospital, Brown’s parents raised him at home where, from an early age, he displayed a keen interest in the arts and literature. Lacking formal schooling, he taught himself to write and paint with the only limb of which he had control—his left leg. In 1952, Brown published “My Left Foot”, which quickly became a literary sensation and was later made into an Academy award winning film. Although best known for “My Left Foot”, Brown published a series of other novels, including “Down all the Days”, which was translated into 14 languages. Christy Brown is one of my heroes. Disability history month not only provides an opportunity to commemorate those achievements and similar achievements, but allows members of the disabled community to express themselves and discuss their experiences of living with a disability. On 22 November, more than 50 people attended the launch of disability history month Scotland in Edinburgh. Contributors included George Lamb—he is present this evening—who recounted his experience of growing up disabled before comparing current and historical attitudes to disability. Jo McFarlane, who is disability history month’s resident poet, spoke with eloquence and scathing humour about the need for disabled people to reclaim their identity and about the recent “hardest hit” rallies. The launch was a tremendous success, and I hope that I will be able to attend next year’s. I would do the Parliament a disservice if I did not note that many of the UK’s 12 million disabled people are still daily victims of bullying, hate crime and systematic discrimination. Between 70 and 80 per cent of disabled people claim to have experienced bullying at school, while 69 disabled people were murdered between 2007 and 2010 and a further 519 were attacked. I cannot finish without touching on the Welfare Reform Bill, which will disproportionately penalise disabled people. That is simply not acceptable, so I and my Labour colleagues will continue to fight the proposals at every turn. I end on a positive note. I am delighted to have had the opportunity to commemorate the on-going struggle of disabled people against adversity. I thank all those who have attended tonight’s debate and I look forward to hearing what other members have to say on this important issue.

I will address the two primary flaws in the bill. First, it is ill defined, especially in its failure to outline what constitutes sectarian or offensive behaviour. Secondly, it is too narrow in scope and content and advances no strategy for combating sectarianism in a broader societal context. The antisectarian charity, Nil by Mouth, defines sectarianism as “Narrow-minded beliefs that lead to prejudice, discrimination, malice and ill-will towards members, or presumed members, of a religious denomination.” The bill contains no alternative definition. It is general where it should be specific and it is turgid where it should be compact. According to the policy memorandum, the bill’s aim is “to tackle sectarianism by preventing offensive and threatening behaviour related to football matches ... particularly where it incites religious hatred.” However, nowhere in a forest of disparate words and phrases does the bill mention Catholics or Protestants or refer to sectarianism. Evasiveness is a theme of the bill, especially in relation to what constitutes offensive behaviour.

No. One requires only the most cursory knowledge of Scottish football to appreciate that some songs, chants and slogans are brazenly aggressive and discriminatory and others are not. A refusal to engage with that reality and adopt a more detailed and constructive approach has rendered the bill confused and ineffective. According to the BBC’s world service, “A Nation Once Again” has been voted the world’s most popular song. “Give Ireland back to the Irish” was written by Sir Paul McCartney, and “Sunday, Bloody Sunday” by John Lennon. “The Soldier’s Song” is the national anthem of Ireland. All those songs are commonly sung on the terraces. Are they to be banned? The bill’s barometer of offensive behaviour is “behaviour that a reasonable person would be likely to consider offensive.” At the weekend, Scottish Police Federation chairman Les Gray said that if we have to tell people what is offensive and what is not we are in big trouble. That is the same man who said: “I’ve been in homes with King Billy on the wall and on the other side with the Pope on the wall, and both sides are just as bad.” If such an enlightened attitude is typical of a reasonable person, I agree that we are in big trouble. In practice, the task of negotiating the minefield of deciding who is reasonable and what is abusive will fall to the police. I am a proud Celtic supporter and I have followed my team far and wide, in stadiums throughout the country. I have heard and seen things that I found offensive. I have heard rival fans sing that I am in the wrong country, that the famine is over so why don’t I go home, and that I only sing in the chapel. I have seen potatoes thrown at Celtic fans, as bananas were once thrown at black footballers. I have heard Irish nationals—yes, Irish nationals—such as Aiden McGeady and James McCarthy, being booed and taunted in football grounds up and down the country. However, when I have pointed out the culprits to police officers, I have been ignored or told that the perpetrators will be dealt with later. Not once has my complaint been acted on. I do not understand the logic of handing the police additional powers when they are failing to use the powers that are at their disposal. Moreover, the police will never eradicate sectarianism, because they are dealing only with the symptoms, not the causes. Until we recognise that sectarianism is a societal problem, which requires a sophisticated response, we will never make progress. In stark contrast to a rushed and ill-conceived bill, Scottish Labour’s 11-point action plan incorporates three key elements: examination, education and communication. It features a raft of innovative proposals, including a proposal for a comprehensive review of how educators can promote religious and cultural tolerance. Education is the most effective way of confronting bigoted attitudes. It should begin in schools but it should not end there. Colleges, universities and employers throughout the public and private sectors should be required to conduct regular seminars and workshops that promote tolerance and understanding within and between faiths and cultures. The only way we can rid ourselves of sectarianism is to broadcast the message loud and clear: in 21st century Scotland sectarianism—like racism, anti-Semitism and homophobia—is utterly unacceptable. I urge members to consider the points that I have made. I ask them to vote with their consciences and to vote against the bill.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what meetings the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment has had with North Lanarkshire Council officials regarding building a new railway station at Plains. (S4O-00436)

Does the minister agree that a railway station at Plains is vital to the local economy? Is he aware—I am sure that he is—that, in 2007, North Lanarkshire Council was happy to give its full support to the proposal for a station at Plains before the Scottish National Party took the decision not to proceed? Will he get around the table with North Lanarkshire Council and Network Rail and make good the election pledge that his party made to deliver a station at Plains?

When I read the Government’s carers strategy, one passage immediately stood out: “Carers are ... fundamental to strong families and partnerships and to resilient and cohesive communities. The lives of carers and the cared-for are closely intertwined, but they are not the same.” I fully agree with that statement, which places great emphasis on ensuring that carers receive sufficient support and respite to live their own lives. [Interruption.]

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I apologise for breaking the system. A recurrent problem with Government strategies is the glaring contrast between the words on the page and the reality on the ground. Indeed, the Government concedes in the carers strategy that “policy developments have not always resulted in real improvements in carer support”. That is not good enough. Words are empty unless they are translated into action. As Benjamin Franklin said, “Well done is better than well said.” I will give an insight into the reality on the ground by sharing with members my recent, sobering glimpse into the life of a carer, whom I shall refer to as X. X is the primary carer for her infant son and her ageing mother. Her son has a range of physical and mental health issues, which are best described as severe and complex and include recurring respiratory infections, frequent viral infections and a communication disorder. The problems first manifested themselves when the child was six months old, shortly after X became the primary carer for her mother, who has vascular dementia, diabetes and pernicious anaemia. X has two other children, who are aged 10 and four, and she works from home on a part-time basis, having been forced to resign a full-time post to care for her mother and son. Her partner is self-employed and works long, unpredictable hours. For X, it is not simply a matter of being present for her mother and son. The time that she spends with them is physically and emotionally draining. Despite the difference in age, there are strange parallels between the care required by her mother and that required by her son. When she is with her mother, X must tend to the physical, mental and social needs of a person whose mind has long since left her. She must also shop for her mother and ferry her to and from hospital appointments. When she is with her son, she must again contend with a complex range of physical and mental requirements. Her son, like her mother, must be taken to and from hospital appointments, and he also struggles to communicate his mental and physical needs. He cannot be reasoned with or coaxed or cajoled as other children can be. Amid all that, X is left with little time for the rest of her family. She tells me that she tries to ensure that they do things together like a normal family but that neither her son’s nor her mother’s condition and behaviour are normal. For X, normality is a perpetual cycle of pervasive anxiety, stress and exhaustion. How can we help X and others like her to escape that cycle? A useful and practical innovation would be the introduction of carers cards, which would be presented when the cared-for individual was admitted to hospital. A carers card would contain a brief description of the patient’s condition, thus removing the obligation on carers constantly to reiterate the position, which is an experience that many carers find stressful, depending on the circumstances of admission. We need to focus on respite services, which would be of great benefit to my constituent and the many carers who face similar challenges in their daily lives. I welcome the minister’s announcement of £2 million for the short breaks fund, but I wonder how it will be managed. As the minister might know, Barnardo’s Scotland, which is heavily involved in the delivery of short breaks in Lanarkshire, thinks that there should be a clearer definition of “short break”. Carers who work with Barnardo’s Scotland regard short breaks as a lifeline that enables families to stay together and think that the service is invaluable in enabling them to cope with family life.

I could not agree more. Those problems will develop as we go forward in life, as challenges face us. Local authorities must view the provision of short breaks as a priority. They must also ensure that the breaks are tailored to individual need, as recommended in the personalisation agenda. Other members will no doubt highlight discrepancies between respite targets and figures, and inconsistencies in care across local authority areas. However, the carers strategy stipulates that carers themselves must be much more involved in the care process, and I know that, were I to ask X whether she receives sufficient respite, the answer would be an emphatic no. Forget about the figures—that is the reality, and it is the only evidence I need. In Lanarkshire alone, there are more than 87,000 carers. Between them, they provide help and support that are equivalent to about £1.4 billion annually. Were it not for the input of those selfless individuals, we would not be living in a civilized society. I will end with another excerpt from the carers strategy: “We owe it to Scotland’s carers not only to get the laws and guidance right, but also to make sure that words are translated into action on the ground.” I could not agree more—so when do we start?

First, I extend my warmest thanks to Ben McKendrick of the British Heart Foundation and Charles Fawcett of healthy lifestyle Scotland. They and their organisations have made invaluable contributions to furthering the case for introducing emergency life-support training in Scottish schools and have laid much of the groundwork that has helped to bring about this evening’s debate. I also thank my fellow MSPs in all parties who have signed the motion and all those who are attending the debate. As an ancient proverb has it, whoever saves a life saves the world entire. What is the value to society of creating a whole generation of potential life-savers? Life is a gift and privilege and the ability to save it transcends any quantitative or qualitative assessment. I am sad to say that many of us will have looked on powerless as a fellow human being suffers pain or a friend or loved one hovers on the brink between life and death. There can be few worse experiences. On many such occasions, there is nothing that we or indeed anyone can do to help and the cruel reality is that these are the times when we would do anything—indeed, give anything—to be able to make a difference.

Absolutely. I commend the member for the work that he has done on Skye on this issue. We must not pass up any opportunity to ensure that emergency life-support training is available in schools throughout Scotland. In the most extreme situations, most of us take refuge in the practical and in what we as individuals can do to assist. However, if we do not know what to do, we cannot assist. What if someone were to have a cardiac arrest in front of us, something that happens 25 times a day in Scotland? Our natural instinct is to help, to do something to offset death or to alleviate the pain. Let us be honest: even those trained in ELS will find the experience terrifying but at least they will know what to do and they will have the skills and knowledge to give that person—who could be their father, mother, son or daughter—the best possible chance of survival. One can only imagine the rising tide of panic and desperation and overwhelming sense of helplessness that someone without ELS training will feel. I know which situation I, as a patient or carer, would rather be in. Scotland’s battle against heart disease is so well known that it feels almost trite to mention it. However, the figures still make for stark reading. Scotland has been referred to as the sick man of Europe and, to our collective shame, the label has some validity. Rates of coronary heart and cardiovascular disease are notably higher in Scotland than they are in the United Kingdom and elsewhere in Europe. Even if we take the UK in isolation, heart disease rates in Scotland remain disproportionately high. Although over the past 20 years the overall incidence of heart disease has fallen across the UK, data compiled by the British Heart Foundation show that, in 2008, 81 Scottish males per 100,000 of population aged between 34 and 75 died from coronary heart disease, a figure that is 30 per cent higher than the UK average. Of course, providing emergency life-support training in schools will not, by itself, solve the problem. Prevention is key and it is imperative that, as a nation, we achieve a collective and substantial change in habit, attitude, health and lifestyle. I am sure that we are all well versed in the steps that we can take to reduce the risk of cardiovascular or coronary heart disease. Indeed, most of us could recite them verbatim: eat healthily; drink in moderation; do not smoke; and do more exercise. Nevertheless, the message does not appear to be getting through and that is why I believe that information on healthy living should accompany emergency life-support training. However, I have some good news—and I am glad to say that it is genuinely good news. Thanks to a lot of hard work by a number of individuals, there are already some excellent examples of ELS training models in Scotland. As a Central Scotland MSP, I am proud to say that at the vanguard of those is the North Lanarkshire heartstart scheme, led locally by the healthy lifestyle co-ordinator Charles Fawcett. Established in 2008, the North Lanarkshire programme provides schools with on-going support for and advice on ELS training and is supported by, among others, the British Heart Foundation and St Andrew’s Ambulance Association. I am sure that colleagues will highlight other examples of partnership working for that kind of training elsewhere in the country. What exactly does emergency life-support training involve? It covers vital skills such as assessing an unconscious patient; performing cardiopulmonary resuscitation; dealing with choking and serious bleeding; helping someone who might be having a heart attack; and providing instruction on the use of defibrillators. A model piloted in St Ambrose high school in Coatbridge and other North Lanarkshire schools offers an integrated and sustainable approach to delivering the programme within the context of curriculum for excellence. I was fortunate enough to meet some of the pupils—namely Vicky McDowell, Monica Berry, Gemma Daly, Lauren Owens and Kerryn Breen—at the event in Holyrood last month that was hosted by my colleague Helen Eadie. Along with pupils from Portree high school, they exhibited great skill and knowledge in demonstrating a range of emergency life-support techniques, including ways of using defibrillators. For every minute that passes without defibrillation in the aftermath of a cardiac arrest, the chances of survival decrease by 14 per cent. Defibrillators are simple to use and surprisingly inexpensive, and we should act to ensure that the life-saving machines are widely available in public places—for example, in schools and workplaces, on public transport, and along major transport routes. Thanks to the hard work and commitment of a number of partner agencies—not least, North Lanarkshire Council—emergency life-support training is now available in 90 per cent of North Lanarkshire schools. That is a shining example to the rest of the country. Scotland’s local authorities have a large degree of flexibility over what is taught in their areas. I therefore hope that other councils will follow North Lanarkshire Council’s lead and give serious consideration to implementing the heartstart programme. Emergency life-support training is hugely popular with pupils, parents and teachers; it adheres to the aims and spirit of the curriculum for excellence; it is cost effective; and, crucially, it can—it will—save lives. The heartstart campaign is now looking for other local authorities to volunteer to become heartstart councils and to move towards full affiliation in the months ahead. We can all help in that, by making the case directly with our local authority colleagues, urging them to seize this unique and valuable opportunity, which is in the best interests of all our constituents. If necessary, I hope that the Scottish Government will provide financial support and will work closely with the campaign organisers as well as with the councils that sign up. There will be financial implications in all this, but considerable expertise and support is available from the wide array of organisations that are backing the campaign and which stand ready and willing to help. As I said at the beginning of my speech, what is the value of a generation of life-savers? The question that we ask should not be, “Can we afford to do this?” It should be, “How can we afford not to?”

Yesterday I spoke in the debate on welfare reform. There are some policy areas that should transcend the political divide and unite us in a common purpose. Welfare and housing are two such areas. In “Homes Fit for the 21st Century—The Scottish Government’s Strategy and Action Plan for Housing in the Next Decade: 2011-2020”, the Scottish Government articulated its commitment, which I welcome, to “enhance the quality and sustainability of our existing housing stock” and to ensure that everyone has “a safe, warm home which they can afford”. On the face of it, that is a laudable aim. However, I have some concerns, chiefly pertaining to the Government’s definitions of what is “sustainable” and what is “affordable”. In 2002, the then Scottish Executive set up the homelessness task force, which was a multi-agency forum that produced a draft of proposals to tackle homelessness. The key recommendation, which is now a legislative duty, was that there be a commitment that would require local authorities to assess all homelessness applications as a “priority” by 2012—the 2012 commitment. The progress that has been made by local authorities towards that target has been strong, if somewhat uneven. In 2009-10, 85 per cent of homelessness applications were assessed as being priority applications, with a third of local authorities exceeding 90 per cent. However, some local authorities have made little progress. They—and therefore we as a country—face a real challenge in meeting the 2012 commitment. Clearly, the Scottish Government will want to do everything possible to support them. If the priority needs test were to be abolished now, local authorities would have to secure settled accommodation for an additional 1,318 households—that is, those that are currently assessed as non-priority. Despite the action that has already been taken, homelessness applications have increased over the past 10 years, peaking at 60,500 in 2005-6, before dropping to 56,000 in 2010, which is still over 10,000 more than in the mid-1990s. Concealed within that figure are a number of worrying trends. The fractured and roving nature of modern society has seen a massive increase in the number of single-person households—they make up 62 per cent of the total—and 31 per cent of applications were from households with children, most of which were single-parent households. So what is the Scottish Government’s sustainable and affordable solution to the problem? The SNP manifesto promised to deliver “6000 new socially-rented houses” for every year of this session of Parliament. Leaving aside the obvious disparity between affordable homes and socially rented ones, I would like to establish whether the “affordable” homes really are affordable. Residential social landlords will provide 850 new homes, which represents an overall increase of 1,550 in the social rented housing stock. Even with 1,000 houses approved for owner-occupiers—which self-evidently do not qualify as social rented housing—there is still a 3,450 shortfall. We must assume, therefore, that the shortfall will be made up by intermediate rented housing, which is a new form of housing procurement to be overseen by the national housing trust. Are those homes affordable for those who desperately require permanent housing? Do they constitute a sustainable long-term solution? Well—let us see. The costs of development for those houses will be shared between local authorities and private developers. The interest on the loans that will be incurred will be covered by rental income. In order to see a return, private developers will require rents to be set at a level that will exclude the vast proportion of homeless applicants. Furthermore, the houses will remain on the social rental market for only five to 10 years, after which many will, in all likelihood, become private stock. Intermediate rented housing is not affordable for those who need help most, nor is it a sustainable solution to the lack of social rented housing. In “Housing: Fresh Thinking, New Ideas” the Scottish Government stresses the importance of distinguishing between different types of affordable housing, yet it simultaneously admits that the most deprived are those who are most reliant on social rented housing. That is quite correct: 53 per cent of social housing in Scotland is situated in the 15 per cent most deprived areas, with an additional 160,000 people on council house waiting lists. I will finish by considering the circumstances of those who would benefit most from additional social housing. Of homeless people, 36 per cent are single adults under the age of 24; many are victims of violence or abuse, or suffer from mental health problems or from drug or alcohol addiction. I recently visited Barnardo’s Scotland’s North Lanarkshire youth housing support service, which provides crisis intervention and group-work support to young people aged 16 to 24. Their need for secure and supportive homes cannot be overstated and too many are currently left in temporary accommodation. Even if they secure permanent accommodation, it is often poorly furnished. There is no sense of belonging and no sense of pride, respect or permanence. It is impossible to establish a stable and healthy lifestyle under such circumstances. Under the Welfare Reform Bill, the community care grant will be devolved to Holyrood. That will provide the Scottish Government with an ideal opportunity to aid those vulnerable young people. I would like to see the following changes to the community care grant system: the grant should be replaced with a similar grant that supports people setting up and staying in homes; applicants should be able to apply for the grant prior to securing accommodation, which they are currently unable to do; and successful applicants should receive their grant on receipt of the keys to their accommodation. The application process should be reformed to prevent applications from being rejected unnecessarily, and the rules and criteria should be clear and consistently applied across Scotland. Finally, grant awards should be sufficient to allow applicants to furnish a home properly. The Scottish Government has been justly critical of the Welfare Reform Bill; now it will have a chance to show how it would do things differently.

If members type my name into Google—which I am sure they all do daily—they will see that the second most popular search response is “Siobhan McMahon disability”. That gives some insight into the curiosity that disability arouses. I will set the record straight. I have spastic hemiparesis, which is a form of cerebral palsy. I have lived with that disability all my life and I take many of its consequences for granted. Every so often, however, I pause to consider its implications. I cannot drive a car without adaptation. I cannot tie my own shoelaces. I cannot chop an onion unsupervised. It is surprising how easy it is to forget one’s inability to perform such basic tasks, but I am thankful for that ease. My problems are nothing to what many disabled people are forced to contend with. On their behalf, I passionately object to the Welfare Reform Bill’s contents. The Scottish campaign on welfare reform argues that we should make respect for human rights and dignity the cornerstone of our new welfare system. I would go further than that. I believe that the welfare system should be based on four pillars: respect for human rights, dignity, compassion and trust. We all remember the Tories’ commitment to creating a compassionate society. The Welfare Reform Bill makes it perfectly clear that that commitment was not worth the Michelin-starred napkin it was scribbled on. With the full impact of the UK Government’s economic policy beginning to take hold, the Tories are desperate to root out the so-called cheats and benefits scroungers who haunt their dreams like so many sprites and goblins. In their eyes, and under the UK Government, the compassionate society has morphed into the suspicious society—full of dishonest, unscrupulous and lazy people who will fake disability at the drop of a hat and who would rather break their own arms than do an honest day’s work. That is not my experience. In my experience, disabled people are honest, hard working and a great deal more determined than most. Those who live without a disability find it impossible to imagine a life without the free and total use of their mental and physical faculties, but that inability to imagine the constraints that are imposed on disabled people does not prevent us as a society from treating them with the courtesy, respect and compassion that they deserve. They are of equal worth and value. Unfortunately, judging by the contents of the bill, the Westminster Government does not share that belief. In outlining its plans to replace the disability living allowance with the personal independence payment, the Tory-led coalition invoked the sacred political cows of efficiency and simplification. It talks about creating a welfare system that is affordable and sustainable. It may be affordable and sustainable for those people, but it will not be for the many disabled people who are plunged into poverty because of the Government’s determination to cut the disability living allowance by 20 per cent. A cut of 20 per cent will eventually amount to an annual sum of £2.1 billion being taken directly out of the pockets of disabled people. l do not know where that money will end up, but I doubt that it will go to more deserving people. It will most likely go to servicing the debt that is, thanks to the UK Government’s perverse economic policy, rapidly increasing. What worries me most about the new proposals is that, at their core, there is a fundamental lack of trust and respect for the dignity of disabled people, who will be required to jump through even more bureaucratic hoops and will be subjected to ever-more humiliating and intrusive eligibility checks in order to receive money to which they are entitled. The new checks will operate as a process of exclusion. The 20 per cent cut to the disability living allowance will not be achieved without a significant cut in the number of claimants. Given that there are already more disabled people in the UK than the number who are currently claiming benefits, that is very worrying. The Government hopes to save £1.45 billion of annual disability living allowance expenditure by 2014-15. The Scottish campaign on welfare reform has said: “To put this figure in context; annual expenditure on all those currently in receipt of lowest rate care is approximately £900m”. Therefore, in order to reach the target figure, all those people—along with a significant number of those on higher rates—would have to lose their care. It is telling that the personal independence payment makes no allowance for those who are currently on lower-rate care, as Bob Doris said. In Scotland, it has been estimated that in order to reduce the disability living allowance by 20 per cent, a fifth of the current 340,510 claimants will lose their entitlement in its entirety. That is 68,000 people. The combined annual loss of benefits would amount to £260 million. Moreover, if the new assessment tests are restricted to people who are of working age, a staggering one in three disabled people aged from 16 to 65 will lose all their current entitlement. I have spent hours wading through the numerous briefings that I have been sent by charities and external organisations that are dismayed by the proposals. I know that the Scottish Government has received similar briefings, so I would be grateful if it responded to them and outlined its strategy for dealing with the increased financial and administrative burdens that will be placed on Scottish local authorities, social services and the NHS. Scotland will suffer disproportionately from the cuts, as we have more people with disabilities and long-term health issues. There is already a lack of clarity in the bill. The SNP’s reluctance to state how it plans to deal with the proposals will only add to the anxiety and stress that are being felt by the thousands of disabled people who will feel the bill’s full and devastating impact. The SNP Government is justly critical of many Westminster policies and is forever eager to remind us that things would be different if more powers were devolved. I strongly oppose the bill, but at least it gives the Scottish Government a chance to show its mettle in the full gaze of the public eye. Does it have the courage of its convictions? Scottish Labour stands for social justice. The bill is not just, but constitutes a vicious and unprecedented attack on the rights of disabled people. I call on members to reject the legislative consent motion when it comes before Parliament.

As the motion states, over the short lifetime of the Scottish Parliament “significant progress” has been made in the way in which we perceive and deal with mental health issues. I am pleased with the emphasis in the consultation document on collaboration and co-operation in the provision of mental health services. A preventative approach to mental ill health—an approach predicated on good education and early intervention—is essential, especially when it comes to diagnosing and treating behavioural conditions and mental distress in children and young adults. I admit to being somewhat deflated by the fact that any debate on mental health inevitably involves the discussion of stigma, discrimination and prejudice. The health of the mind is no less important than the health of the body, but society has a tendency to prioritise the tangible, such as a broken arm or leg, a deep wound or the external manifestations of cancer or heart disease. We know that those things exist and are real because we see the havoc that they wreak on the body, whereas an ailment of the mind is more elusive. Mental illness may have a very marked effect on personality or behaviour, but its lack of an easily discernible cause or concrete physical manifestation means that it is often not afforded the same respect and importance as physiological illness. However, as modern life becomes increasingly pressured and demanding, and as medical advances continue to ensure longer life spans, the number of people who are affected by mental health issues will continue to rise. A recent study revealed that, every year, 38 per cent of European Union citizens suffer from some form of psychological or neurological disorder, with 14 per cent suffering anxiety disorders, 6.9 per cent experiencing depression and 5.4 per cent having dementia. With an ageing population leading to an increase in neurological conditions such as Alzheimer’s and dementia, and with 90 per cent of anxiety disorders occurring for the first time in children under 18, it is possible to envisage a crisis at both ends of the age spectrum. Other than the positive suggestions that are already contained in the consultation document, what can be done to avoid such a crisis? We must view the causes and effects of mental ill health across a broad canvas. The curriculum for excellence should include training for teachers that helps them to identify children who may be suffering from anxiety disorders. That could be usefully combined with other recommendations in the consultation document, such as that there should be greater integration of and communication between local authorities, schools and social and health services. Equality and inclusion are vital to improving mental health. Those who are in mental distress often feel isolated, abandoned and alone. That is partly a product of their illness, which encourages insularity and self-absorption, but it is also partly a product of residual misconceptions, stigmas and prejudices. Many people in mental distress have a negative attitude to their condition and suffer from self-loathing and low self-esteem. To help them to escape that pernicious cycle, we must demonstrate that we, as a society, care about them and value them. Evidence has shown that the healthiest and most equal societies are also the happiest. Conversely, symptoms of inequality such as poverty, abuse, substance misuse, unemployment and homelessness all contribute to a downward spiral of depression and hopelessness. A truly co-ordinated and preventative approach is one that recognises that and takes action to eradicate poverty and ensure equal opportunities for all. Equality of access to sporting, educational and artistic opportunities can alleviate mental health problems, as can exposure to green spaces and positive physical environments. Regular employment can be of considerable benefit, both as a route out of poverty and as a means of providing a sense of meaning and purpose in life. It is, therefore, imperative that the forthcoming welfare reforms do not allow people with mental health issues to slip through the net. We should utilise the immense natural resources at our disposal. Scotland has some of the most beautiful and evocative scenery in the world, regular exposure to which would greatly enhance our physical, emotional and mental wellbeing. Involvement in group sports encourages positive contact and interaction with other people, and the recuperative power of art and literature should not be discounted. If we are to end the stigma of mental illness, we should also attend to the language that we use in daily life. Many members will remember The Sun’s “Bonkers Bruno” headline, for which it got little more than a slap on the wrist. Unfortunately, such phrases are still used with alarming regularity, feeding into the language and perpetuating misconceptions of mental illness. If press outlets persist in belittling mental illness with flippant and irrelevant references to “psychos” and “schizos”, severe and appropriate action must be taken. The approach is outlined in clause 12 of the Press Complaints Commission’s code, which is on discrimination. As with the casual use of sectarian language, ignorance or lack of intent is no excuse. We need to take an empirical approach to prescribing treatment. Prescriptions for antidepressants are on an upward curve. The danger is that pills will become the default solution to problems that could be solved through discussion-based therapies that encourage individuals to question established patterns of thought and behaviour. GPs and other health professionals must be aware of the different forms of treatment that are on offer, whether they are provided by the NHS, local authorities or the third sector. We must remember that mental distress, especially in its severest manifestations, does not just impact on individuals. We must widen access to post-bereavement counselling to ensure that those who have lost a relative or friend to suicide are afforded the help and support that they need. In a civilised democracy, individual rights and freedoms are cherished. We must empower people to take ownership of their lives and to be an active part of the solution to their problems. As anyone who has suffered from mental distress knows only too well, “The mind is its own place, and in itself Can make a heaven of hell, a hell of heaven.”

The Scottish Government’s zero waste plan was intended to lead to waste disposal being regulated in “a better, more consistent way”, and to help clarify the existing waste management regulations, which were described as “complicated and difficult to understand.” The targets that are laid out in the zero waste plan are ambitious, and such ambition should be lauded, but we must ensure that, in the rush to meet the targets, we do not sacrifice long-term benefits for short-term gains. The introduction to the zero waste plan states that it is underpinned by a determination to make “best practical use of the approach in the waste management hierarchy: waste prevention, reuse, recycling and recovery.” There are currently 20 proposals for waste incinerators in Scotland, many of which do not meet those criteria. For example, pyrolysis incinerators burn waste at high temperatures to extract energy from waste. That is one of the two least-favoured options in the waste hierarchy, as it undermines efforts to reduce, recycle, and reuse. The zero waste plan states that, by 2025, no more than 25 per cent of municipal waste should be used for energy from waste, with the remaining 75 per cent recycled. In January 2010, Audit Scotland reported that councils were highly unlikely to meet the target and noted that, to have any chance of meeting it, councils would require additional composting and recycling centres—so, not more waste incinerators. However, Government reporters who were reviewing a recent case contradicted that by stating that an incinerator was “urgently” needed to work towards zero waste targets. That leaves us in something of a quandary, because the more incinerators we build, the less likely we are to meet our recycling targets. The inconsistencies do not end there. According to the zero waste plan, waste management developments “should be located in sites where potential impacts on the human, built and natural environment can be minimised.” However, in certain recent cases, seemingly legitimate concerns about the potential impact of the development on the human, built and natural environment have been dismissed. Finally, and perhaps more pertinently in this debate, the zero waste plan states: “Members of the public and community groups have an important role in the planning system and are encouraged to get involved in the development planning process and planning applications.” In the past two years, local people have united in opposition to proposals to build incinerators in their areas. The groups have involved themselves from the start of the planning process and, where they have thought that they have been excluded, they have made great efforts to ensure that their voices are heard. Thousands of objections that have been lodged against waste management planning applications and many thoughtful and reasoned arguments that have been offered in support of those objections have effectively been discounted. The final recourse in such cases is to instigate costly legal proceedings. That brings us to the equivocal position that the Scottish Government and Scottish National Party MSPs occupy. Although the Government is on record as being opposed to large-scale and inefficient energy-from-waste facilities, that did not prevent it from appointing reporters to review a local council’s decision to refuse planning permission for a pyrolysis plant, despite the fact that the Government retains complete discretion over which appeals it chooses to delegate. Some local SNP MSPs who were seeking re-election were vocal in their condemnation of local planning decisions about waste management facilities, only for post-electoral changes in their professional circumstances to cause them to become a great deal more circumspect. Rather than calling for Government interventions, they have ceded responsibility and neglected to represent their constituents. The zero waste management policy was designed to iron out inconsistencies and contradictions in the current planning regulations, to make the process more transparent, to give local communities a voice and to ensure that waste management targets are met in the most efficient and environmentally friendly ways possible. It has not achieved those things. We need more than effective waste reduction targets; we need a realistic programme to achieve those targets and we need clear and concise planning regulations across local and national government, on which there has been wide consultation and which take into account the views of local people. We need to ensure that environmental justice is available to all and is not prohibitively expensive, as it currently is.

Is the First Minister aware of the recent decision to withdraw preferred bidding status from St Philip’s secure unit in Plains? Is he aware that, as a consequence of the decision by the Cabinet Secretary for Justice, the unit will cease to operate tomorrow, resulting in its 259 staff being made compulsorily redundant, leaving many vulnerable children without the necessary support services? Is he aware that, although the staff were advised by Alex Neil that a task force was being set up, Skills Development Scotland has denied that? What support is the Government offering to the staff at this time? What transitional arrangements are in place for the children?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what its position is on the capacity of Social Care and Social Work Improvement Scotland to carry out its duties in light of recent budget changes. (S4O-00092)

Is the cabinet secretary aware of the worrying data that SCSWIS has released in response to Labour’s freedom of information request? Does she know, for example, that in North Lanarkshire four privately owned care homes were revealed to be weak on quality of care and support and that eight privately owned care homes are either weak or unsatisfactory in at least one inspection area? That means that 23 per cent of North Lanarkshire stock is falling short of the required standard. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will agree that that is unacceptable.

Does the cabinet secretary agree that cutting the budget for SCSWIS, the organisation that is tasked with supporting improvement and signposting good practice, will not improve matters, will inhibit the organisation’s capacity to carry out the duty and will lead to further deterioration in standards?

The cabinet secretary has said that he will ensure that the additional revenue is distributed fairly. How will he achieve that and will all universities be able to hold on to the additional revenue that they generate?

8. To ask the Scottish Executive what changes it proposes to make in relation to solicitors’ access to prisoners in police custody in light of the Cadder v Her Majesty’s Advocate ruling. (S4O-00069)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his response, but I am concerned about the proposals on a number of points. First, there seems to be an inherent conflict of interest in SLAB—a Government body providing advice and solicitors for accused persons. Why, if the detention period is to be increased to 12 hours, are solicitors to be required to attend a police station within one hour—a requirement that effectively will render them on-call for 24 hours a day? Secondly, what steps is the Government taking to ensure that an adequate number of solicitors will remain on the police duty scheme, given the decision of Hamilton, Stirling, Alloa and Edinburgh to withdraw en masse from it?

I am glad to have the opportunity to speak in this debate, as it allows me to highlight an urgent, important issue to a great number of constituents in Central Scotland. In March 2010, North Lanarkshire Council’s planning committee refused permission for plans to build a pyrolysis incinerator in the Coatbridge area. However, following an appeal by the applicant, Shore Energy, Government reporters overturned that decision. For the purposes of clarity, and to provide some background detail, I will briefly outline how the two sides arrived at their decisions. North Lanarkshire Council refused planning permission on four counts: first, that the proposals were contrary to the terms of the development plan and the Glasgow and Clyde area waste plan; secondly, that the construction of the incinerator would lead to increased traffic levels at the Shawhead interchange that would be detrimental to road safety; thirdly, that those increased traffic levels would be detrimental to public health; and finally, that the council believed that it had not been adequately demonstrated that the incinerator would not be detrimental to public health. In overturning the decision, the Government reporters stated that the incinerator was urgently needed to work towards zero waste policy targets; that the incinerator would not be detrimental to the health of adults and children living in the area; that only a limited number of homes in the near vicinity “would suffer a large adverse effect”; and that there was insufficient evidence that the plant would add significantly to traffic congestion. Local opposition to the incinerator is intense. It has attracted 6,000 objections and has prompted residents to form a campaign group, Monklands residents against pyrolysis plant.

Yes. I have made the point that the issue is not with the council. I am asking for the Government to stand up for the people. In opting to refuse to grant planning permission, North Lanarkshire Council took the views and feelings of residents into account. Councillors recognised the adverse impact that the plant would have on the quality of life in the area. They listened to, considered and accepted the evidence that pyrolysis—the process of converting waste to energy by incineration—is fraught with difficulty and is of uncertain value in meeting waste reduction targets. The council’s process was fair, open and democratic. The reporters’ arguments for overturning the decision hinged on what they called the “urgent need” to build additional waste management facilities in the area in order to meet zero waste targets by 2025. The reporters’ report says that the need for additional waste management capacity “is so urgent that it would run contrary to national policy to delay the determination of this appeal”. It appears that the need for additional capacity was more important than its nature. Pyrolysis systems are relatively new, and their safety has not yet been established. Energy from waste is one of the least preferred options in the waste hierarchy, as it undermines efforts to recycle and reuse. Like any process that produces potentially harmful emissions, it is of dubious environmental value. However, in their anxiety to ensure that Scotland meets its zero waste targets, the reporters appear to have overlooked those details. The reporters claimed that the facility would have no significant impact on health, although Lanarkshire’s inhabitants are 44 per cent more likely than average to be admitted to hospital with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

I am aware of and against that proposal, which I will speak about. The statistics that I cited will be aggravated by the additional air pollution that results from the pyrolysis process. Unlike the councillors who rejected the initial application for the Coatbridge facility, the reporters had no democratic mandate. Their decision was taken in defiance of the passionate objections of 6,000 people. It directly contradicts the Scottish Government’s explicit opposition to such plants, as stated by Jim Mather when he informed you, Presiding Officer, in your capacity as a constituency MSP, that the Government does “not support large-scale, inefficient energy-from-waste facilities.”—[Official Report, 10 March 2011; c 34244.] Despite that, and despite local people’s passionate objections, the Scottish Government declined to intervene and to prevent the appeal process from proceeding, as is its right under the Town and Country Planning (Determination of Appeals by Appointed Persons) (Prescribed Classes) (Scotland) Regulations 1987. The Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, Alex Neil, informed local media that his party “has opposed this application since day one”. If that is so, why did the Government not prevent the appeal from progressing when it had the chance? The Minister for Local Government and Planning, Aileen Campbell, campaigned against a similar incinerator in Dovesdale in South Lanarkshire, which Jim Hume just spoke about. When planning permission for that facility was granted, she expressed “massive disappointment and concern”. Why has she issued no such statement about the waste incinerator in Coatbridge? Two things are apparent. First, local people’s rights and wishes have been shamefully trampled on. Given the concentration of waste disposal facilities in the area, I am sure that I am not alone in questioning whether North Lanarkshire and South Lanarkshire are being unfairly targeted. Their relative proximity to Glasgow and Edinburgh means that they are considered to be ideal locations for waste incinerators. However, we should not be made Scotland’s dumping ground, and certainly not at the behest of commercial imperatives. An application for judicial review of the decision to grant planning permission in Dovesdale has now been submitted to the Court of Session, and—as we have just heard—a similar measure is likely to be taken over the incinerator at Coatbridge. Given the strength of opposition from local and national politicians, not to mention local residents, it is highly unfortunate that public money is being spent in that way. The Government must urgently review the planning process to ensure that the rights and opinions of those who are affected by such decisions are taken into account. We must also decide whether, as a country, we are serious about our environmental obligations or whether we are prepared to place politics before people and economics before the environment.

I thank Bob Doris for securing a members’ business debate on this issue. I whole-heartedly agree with his calls to develop a consistent long-term strategy to address what remains a source of strife and shame in Scottish society. I will offer a description of sectarianism. My dictionary defines a sectarian as being “narrowly confined or limited in interest, purpose, scope”. Sectarians, then, live in their own worlds and display little or no curiosity about other people’s cultures or values. They look backwards not forwards, and inwards not out. There is nothing wrong with having pride in a particular set of religious or cultural values. I am proud of my Irish heritage, which has been and continues to be a great influence on my life and that of my relatives and friends. My friend John Patrick Keane took part in Gaelic football during his teenage years in Glasgow, and I love to wear my Gaelic football top representing County Clare, where my family are from. My sister Mairead was an exceptional Irish dancer, and the family supported her in events around Scotland, England and Ireland. My brother’s annual trip to Dublin invariably coincides with the hurling finals. I have attended St Patrick’s day parades in Singapore and New York, where it is celebrated in a spirit of goodwill and inclusiveness. Just a few short years ago, Michael McMahon hosted the Parliament’s first St Patrick’s day reception. Yet, despite this, in Scotland St Patrick’s Day remains an occasion that is fraught with tension and, in some cases, with violence because for some people my religion and heritage are the cause of suspicion and hate. I am proud to be a Celtic Football Club supporter and proud of its history. I make no apologies for that. It pains and frustrates me to go along to games and hear rival fans sing that I am in the wrong country, that “the famine is over”, so “why don’t” I go “home”, or that I only sing in the chapel. During their time in Scottish football, Irish nationals Aiden McGeady and James McCarthy were booed and taunted in football grounds up and down the country. One can only imagine the response if English-born Scottish internationals such as Andy Goram received the same treatment south of the border. Those are just some examples of the so-called banter that goes on. Yet, in pointing culprits out to police officers on several occasions, I have been ignored or told that the people would be dealt with later and, on one occasion, told that the officers had not heard anything. It seems that selective hearing as well as selective vision is part and parcel of the modern game. It is worth noting that in society at large we have made much progress. Irish immigrants and people of other origins are no longer discriminated against in the way they once were. However, although it is tempting to infer from the debate that, outside our football stadiums, the problem of sectarianism is by and large as historical as the conflicts that it seeks to glorify, that is not the case. As others have said, the recent interception of viable parcel bombs that were intended for Neil Lennon, Paul McBride and former Labour MSP Trish Godman—for the heinous crimes of, respectively, being Celtic’s manager, being Celtic’s manager’s lawyer and wearing a Celtic shirt to raise money for charity—shows how easily sectarian attitudes can seep into wider society. Sectarianism still exercises a pervasive and dangerous influence on the small-minded. How can we eradicate the scourge of sectarianism? The answer—if I may borrow a phrase—is education, education, education. We must examine the roots of the problem, which might partly reside in the fact that, in Scotland, the boundaries between football and religion have become hopelessly blurred. The same prejudices that persisted through hundreds of years of religious conflict have been imported into the modern game. An analysis of sectarian crimes is expected to reveal that the victims are overwhelmingly Catholic. Although that might be an uncomfortable truth for many, it is a truth that must be faced. Societies throughout history have feared and persecuted the other. During the 19th and early 20th centuries in Scotland, the “other” was the Irish Catholic immigrant. In the years prior to the outbreak of world war two, Irish Catholics were demonised as being criminal alcoholics who stole jobs and depressed wages. However, although we must be honest in the way in which we confront sectarianism, we must also be careful not to isolate and antagonise those whose input and engagement are essential. Calls for an end to denominational schools, for example, are not only unnecessary but potentially destructive. By and large, such schools promote understanding and tolerance, not prejudice, and they should remain part of the education process. Sectarianism is not a problem that is born of religious or social difference; it is a problem that is born of attitude and outlook. In our modern and—for better or worse, depending on one’s point of view—increasingly secular society, there is more to unite devout people of all religious persuasions than there is to divide them. To the faithful, religion is a source of hope and solace—a moral and ethical touchstone that guides our actions in life. In its truest form, religion promotes compassion, empathy and tolerance. Sectarianism is a sad perversion of those values. It is the agent of division and discord. It has no place in football and no place in society, and the sooner it is rooted out and destroyed, the better for all of us.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has in place for regeneration projects in Airdrie and Shotts over the next five years. (S4O-00013)

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to the regeneration of the local area. Does he envisage significant improvements to the infrastructure of Airdrie and Shotts over the next few years? In particular, I would be interested to know whether the Government plans to revisit the proposal to build a new station at Plains as part of the Airdrie to Bathgate rail link, a proposal that the then Minister for Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change, Stewart Stevenson, rejected in 2007.

I am delighted to be able to make my maiden speech in such an important debate. I place on record my thanks to the former constituency members of Central Scotland for their support and friendship, not only in the past few weeks but for the past 12 years. I also pay tribute to Bill Butler and Frank McAveety for the fantastic contribution that they made to the debate on sport in the past few years. I hope that my speech today will not let them down. As Clare Adamson said, the international children’s games—or the mini-Olympics—will be hosted by North and South Lanarkshire in August this year. That great event involves more than 2,000 children from more than 70 cities from throughout the world participating in sports that range from judo to sailing and to track and field. The people of Lanarkshire are looking forward to the event being held in our area, so much so that the deadline for applications to be a volunteer had to be brought forward because of the high number of people applying. This is the first time that the event will be hosted in Scotland and I hope that as many members as possible will attend to show their support for the event and for the participants. Sport is something that brings people together, no matter their background, because everyone has the same goal and vision: to succeed and be the best they can be. That is why it is essential that we do everything that we can to open up access to sport whenever possible. In this economic climate, parents cannot afford to send their children to football practice or dance class, which is why PE in our schools is vital. PE is not only about the fitness of the next generation. That is important, of course, but we must remember that sport is fun; most of us get enjoyment from it, we can share it with our friends and family and we can use it as a release from the day-to-day pressures that we all feel. PE for our children is no different, which is why it is essential that the Government meets its target of two hours a week of PE in our schools as soon as possible. It is not acceptable that that commitment has been put back until 2014. That pledge should be a priority for the Government if it is serious about sport and fitness. Another option that the Government should look at is the provision of free swimming lessons for, in particular, primary school children. One in four children in Scotland is still unable to swim. That is an extremely worrying statistic, because swimming is not just a sport or a means to get fit; it is a life skill that everyone should have the opportunity to learn. For far too many families, the price of swimming lessons is often too high, therefore the Government has to offer help. Free access to council swimming pools is a great initiative that is run throughout the school holidays in Lanarkshire, but free swimming lessons should be introduced to get the real benefits of that programme. The price of sport can be a barrier for many. Many football clubs in my area find it hard to raise the funds that are needed to hire football pitches for training. How can we say that we are serious about sport and about football when we cannot provide affordable facilities? The options in my area for football clubs are to play on red-ash pitches or to pay the high fees to hire a suitable venue for 40 minutes. We have to look at a way of getting more and fairer access to state-of-the art facilities. It is all very well having the new 3G synthetic pitches installed at sports clubs, but when football and rugby clubs cannot afford to use them they cannot be fit for purpose. As I mentioned, access to sport is crucial. That is why the work that is done by organisations such as Sportworx, which works with 15 to 20-year-olds from deprived communities across South Lanarkshire, is vital. Sportworx recognises the good in young people by highlighting their achievements, abilities and potential. The organisation gives young people the opportunity to become sport and dance coaches, which helps with their self-esteem, confidence and life skills. Such organisations are vital if sport is to continue to be at the heart of Scottish culture. One of my greatest achievements in my relatively short life is, of course, being elected to Parliament, but another of those achievements has to be being the only girl on the school football team. I was not there to make up the numbers—they did not give me the nickname of Shevchenko for nothing! I tell the chamber that because I take pride in it; I was proud to be part of that team and to make the friends that I did along the way. If we do not open up access to sport in this country, many young people will not get the opportunity to feel the way that I did. We have to encourage rather than discourage; we have to motivate parents and teachers to become involved in children’s sporting activities; and we have to provide the right support and training whenever and wherever possible. To conclude, I wish to use the words of another member, who stated in their maiden speech in 1999 that “It is only right that the first aim of this Parliament is the creation of prosperity for this country. However, if we do not work to ensure that nobody is in any way excluded from access to that prosperity, we will undoubtedly fail the people.”—[Official Report, 16 June 1999; c 438.] Those are, of course, the words of Michael McMahon. They are as true to this debate today as they were to his in 1999.