The debate is no less welcome for being long awaited. At decision time, Scotland can become the 17th or the 26th country or territory around the world—it depends on how we count it; I will not go into the constitutional issues—to legislate for equal marriage rights for same-sex couples. We will pass what many regard as the last great reform that is required to achieve full equality in law for lesbian, bisexual and gay people. It is true that equality in law will not immediately mean the end of discrimination in all its forms, but it will mean the completion of the first phase of a campaign that began in Scotland at the end of the 1960s and which achieved the decriminalisation of homosexuality in 1980, as others have said. That landmark achievement was slowly followed by equalisation of the age of consent and, ultimately, civil partnerships—an imperfect but at the time progressive move towards our vote today. The bill also makes significant progress on the inclusion of trans and intersex people. After today, campaigning for LGBT people—for example, for better sexual health and education policies and against bullying or stigma—will go on, but the crucial point is that it will do so on a similar basis to that for other groups and from the starting point of full legal equality. While other countries around the world, including our neighbours in England and Wales, have taken the lead, those of us who have supported marriage equality in Scotland have watched and hoped that our day was coming closer. As each country has taken the step, the pressure for change has increased. In each nation, the story of the fight for equality has been different. Each land has its own progressive coalitions, which have been built up over time and which are unique to the relationships and experiences of its people. However, the discrimination and oppression that too many gay and lesbian people have faced have been all too similar. It is said that the world is becoming a smaller place but, for lesbian and gay travellers throughout the generations, the most far-flung destinations must have seemed familiar, because the reality of discrimination has been a constant and near universal fear, wherever is called home. Therefore, I am proud that Scotland can today join the places where difference is neither to be feared nor tolerated but is, rather, accepted. When I spoke in support of the bill at stage 1, I said that I wanted to do more than just win an argument for tolerance. Therefore, I also mean something more when I use the word “accepted”. The prize is not that we no longer care who gets married to whom, but that we recognise individual human relationships. The commitment to love another person and to spend our days with and for them can be a very private matter, but it can also be a proudly public one, if that is wanted. To my mind, that is the right that the bill creates, and it is one that, distinct from civil partnerships, should be available in the same terms to all couples, regardless of their sexuality and whether they profess a faith. That is the right that other countries have created, and we should join them. We should do so not just for our own people in Scotland in order that the state is truly the enemy of discrimination among its citizens rather than just the arbitrator, but because history has already taught us that we are on her right side. In the coming weeks, the eyes of the world will be on Sochi and the winter Olympics there. We will be reminded that the world is not so small and that the attitudes that we rightly condemn in Russia are far more the norm there and elsewhere than what we might boastfully feel are our own enlightened views. Each Parliament that has already made the change has done so in its own fashion. In some, there have been tears, hugs and the singing of national or protest songs. Jackson Carlaw took us somewhat towards that, but not the whole way, thankfully. Our chance at history comes at just after 6 o’clock, but it must be living history for much longer afterwards. We need a Scotland in which we renew our determination to eliminate homophobia and to celebrate, not just tolerate, diversity. We need determination that our small—and, I predict, positive—example will help to ensure that we are not for long the latest legalisers of equal marriage but rather are among the early adopters of change that has already taken far too long. It should be remembered that, for many people in the world, we will be just a far-off dream. Those of us in the Parliament who have campaigned for equal marriage will be pleased with our work today and our work towards today, but there are many days of individual celebration ahead. Those days—not this day—will show that what has been done in the first few countries is more than a dream; it is a hope for all lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people, wherever they live and whatever their experience. That is why I feel very privileged to support the bill.

8. To ask the Scottish Government when it will publish its national litter strategy. (S4O-02824)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the problem of the dumping of waste such as cooking fats and unsold foods by some takeaway establishments. It has been reported that some offenders in Glasgow have come into the city for that purpose and the council has named and shamed some of those establishments. Will the cabinet secretary indicate whether the national strategy will be able to provide for a link between the enforcement of fines against those polluters, which he mentioned in respect of fly tipping, and the licensing system? Does he agree that businesses that behave in that way should know that they stand a chance of being fined if they are caught and risk losing their licence or being refused a future licence?

16. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the recent Financial Times survey on how a vote for independence would affect the Scottish economy and the rest of the United Kingdom in 2014. (S4O-02792)

A hundred economists, academics and business leaders overwhelmingly rejected or expressed concerns about the uncertainty in the Scottish Government’s plans, many using words such as “disastrous”, “catastrophic” and “economically illiterate”. I presume that that was a disappointing response for Mr Swinney. Can he tell us whether the Scottish Government’s plans to default on our debts if the rest of the UK does not agree to a British currency union would be likely to make those economists more open-minded about Scottish independence?

To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has had with the European Union regarding objective justification for charging United Kingdom students tuition fees but not students from other European Union countries in the event of Scotland becoming independent. (S4O-02756) I hope that that question struck a more consensual note.

The Scottish Government has asserted that Scotland’s border with England will be somehow unique in terms of European law and that the ease of transport across it to study somehow means that the Scottish Government can blatantly break EU laws that are designed to prevent member states from discriminating against the citizens of another member state. I presume that the cabinet secretary understands that that position will inevitably end up with our being in court. What assessment has the cabinet secretary made of the practice in other EU countries—for example in our closest neighbour, Ireland, which is part of the common travel area and has not attempted to impose a tuition fee only on English, Welsh and Northern Ireland students as the Scottish Government is proposing? What estimate has been made of the legal costs of defending that very dubious position?

Will the member give way?

Annabelle Ewing said that there is no point in having policy control or policy agreement on childcare if we do not have the finances available to deliver it. What is her view of the Scottish Government’s agreeing with councils in 2008 that they could introduce free school meals and then providing no money for councils to do so, with the consequence that seven years followed without progress on the policy?

As has been said many times, the competition of priorities is the bread and butter of political decision making. However, the issues that we are discussing today are, at their most basic, also intensely practical. How can we help families to make the most of their budgets and how do we do best by our children with the resources that we have? Children, not constitutional settlements, are indeed Scotland’s future. Every day, parents and guardians make decisions about what is best for their children. Parents will know only too well that that often means deciding between two or more things that they would like for their child, such as paying for a home improvement or family holiday versus paying for an opportunity for a child to pursue their talents in sport or to have the chance to learn and play a musical instrument. Each parent will know the process that they go through to rationalise between things when money is tight. That might mean considering whether to agree to another school trip for one child or to spend the money on a brother or sister who would otherwise miss out. Those are the hard but everyday decisions for many of the mums and dads who should be represented in the debate. For the poorest families in Scotland, however, the choice can be even starker. It can be whether to buy a new coat or shoes for a child walking to school in the wind and rain or about what food can be put on the table this week. For many parents, the hardest decision of all might be whether and when to return to work, in the hope that the extra income will help their kids, but knowing that it will mean sacrificing time with their child, relying on grandparents or neighbours to help with childcare or, for many, spending the bulk of their wages on simply knowing that their child is looked after while the work is done and the money is earned. Politicians often refer to our decisions as tough choices between competing good things but, every day, decisions for thousands of families across Scotland are just as hard and, in fact, far more immediate. To an extent, the debate that we have had today has been presented as a choice between free school meals for all our infants and childcare for our most vulnerable two-year-olds, or some extra childcare versus the transformational childcare that the Scottish Government supported a month ago.

No, of course they are not, and they have been arguing that it is a priority for some time, including over the past seven years, in which the Scottish Government has failed to deliver it. The Child Poverty Action Group and others also argue for investment in childcare. The motion tries to set everyday decision making about priorities and best value for the money that we have in a different context—surprise, surprise, that is a constitutional context. The word “transformation” has been much repeated, and it is a concept that I certainly support. We all want transformation of circumstances and opportunity. However, the word is being coupled with another term, which is “only with independence”. Parents across Scotland will this year need to consider why that caveat is being added to a debate about what will be provided for their children. They are told that we will do what is best for their children, but only with independence. The motion asks the Parliament to make our commitment to a major expansion in childcare—which has long been promised, which was repeated and promoted in the white paper and which is within the gift of the Parliament and its budgets—conditional on something that has nothing to do with childcare. We understand that the Scottish Government supports independence. I happen to believe, as I think the majority of Scots do, that partnership, rather than division, and working together with our neighbours on the issues that affect us all is a better constitutional outcome than that promoted by the SNP. We will have that argument this year and, in September, the people of Scotland will decide on it. However, let us not pretend that independence is a solution to the fact that, under this Government, childcare already lags behind what is provided elsewhere in the UK and is today among the most expensive in Europe. The solution to a childcare crisis is not constitutional change; it is more childcare.

We have proposed amendments to deliver the first stage of the Scottish Government’s own proposals but the SNP is failing to support them. The test of whether we care about childcare should not be whether we believe in a separate Scotland or a united Britain but whether we choose to prioritise the resources to help families now.

No thank you. I have already taken two interventions.

The reason is that I have taken two interventions and my time will run out if I go on too long. There are resources available that would make a big difference. We were told that childcare was the Scottish Government’s number 1 priority. In its white paper, the SNP identified more childcare as the most important transformation in circumstance and opportunity that we could achieve if we had the will. Critics could say that that was a belated recognition of inaction since 2007, and cynics could say that it is about votes in the referendum. However, the fact remains that although the SNP said that increasing childcare provision was the single most important thing that we could do to make our country a better place, when faced with the choice and faced with a vote at 5 pm in the chamber, it replies, “Only with independence.” The First Minister is fond of quotations found on the internet, so I will end with one from the online forum gransnet. He might remember it. Grandmothers contributing to that website asked him about independence. They asked whether it was of supreme value, as the founders of his party believed, and whether he would support it “even if it meant that Scottish people gain no economic advantage from independence”. The First Minister replied: “Couldn’t have said it better myself. I fully agree. A sense of identity”. Is that not the truth? The Scottish National Party would support independence for Scotland whether it meant a transformation in childcare for the better or for the worse. It is the only Government in history that proposes a big game-changing proposal and gets the money to deliver it but, when the Opposition agrees and proposes amendments to achieve it, says, “Hang on a minute. We didn’t really mean it.” The only opposition for opposition’s sake going on in the Parliament this afternoon is the SNP’s opposition to its own policy.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

I apologise for the discourtesy in interrupting you, Presiding Officer. I just wanted to make something clear before we come to the vote on the motion on Scotland’s future. I think that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning was somewhat remiss to suggest that we will be voting on the principle of free school meals. As the motion clearly states, we will be voting on the Scottish Government’s belief that independence represents the best future for Scotland. That is what members on this side of the chamber will be voting against, and we hope—

3. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the costs of promoting the white paper on independence. (S4O-02739)

That is about the cost of a trip to the golf. We understand that the Scottish Government took £800,000 from the Scottish Water budget to assist with the costs of promoting the white paper and spent about £12,500 on the launch event at the Glasgow science centre. We know that ministers will be embarking on a roadshow next year to sell the white paper. Will the Deputy First Minister confirm whether the costs of the roadshow will be met with the money taken from Scottish Water, whether they are included in the £450,000 or whether they will be met from any other budget held by the Scottish Government?

Last month, it was reported in the press that the Scottish National Party has diverted £800,000 from Scottish Water to the publicity budget for the Scottish independence white paper. Will the minister confirm to Parliament that that is true and tell us what impact that decision will have on Scottish Water doing its vital job in Hamilton and across Scotland?

5. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on the world forum on natural capital that was held in Edinburgh recently. (S4O-02661)

The minister and other members who might have received a number of emails on the subject will know that the concept of natural capital is not without its critics. However, I have read the helpful briefing that was provided by the Scottish Wildlife Trust, which argues that, although nature should be priceless, that does not mean that it is valueless. What reassurance can the minister offer to those who are concerned about the commodification of market assets because they fear that it might lead to marketisation? What work are SNH and other Government agencies involved in to gauge the appropriateness of the natural capital approach?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

A number of SNP members have made that point about Labour’s global recession. Surely Mr Eadie understands that the First Minister argued for less regulation. What part of the white paper that does not talk about housing sets out a plan for independent regulation of the financial sector?

The Barnett formula is an arrangement for redistributing resources around the United Kingdom. The person who is campaigning hardest for the end of Barnett is the First Minister. Does the First Minister understand that if you are not in it, you will not get it?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

This has been an important and long-awaited debate. For months, dozens of questions about the implications of independence have received holding replies promising that all the answers will be in this one document. Therefore, as far as the Scottish Parliament is concerned, this debate should be the start of a process, not the end. The Parliament may not have been the venue for the launch of the white paper, but it must now be allowed to do its job of—as Patrick Harvie said—scrutinising the claims that have been made. The vote next September has been described as the most important decision that Scotland will ever make. It has been made clear by all sides that the result of the vote should be considered to be definitive, at least for a generation. Arguments must be tested and assertion must be subject to a challenge. A parallel has been drawn with the Labour Government’s white paper that set out its proposals for this Parliament and informed the debate around it. However, this white paper attempts to be two things at once: a manual setting out the facts of an independent Scotland; and, as Jenny Marra said, a manifesto for the SNP. I believe that it falls down on both points but particularly as a manifesto, because a manifesto should set out a vision for fulfilling a mandate, but the referendum next September cannot provide a mandate for actions that are beyond the power of a Scottish Government alone, independent or not. A yes vote would not mean that the EU had to accept Scotland into its membership on Scotland’s terms alone. The rest of the UK cannot be forced to agree a currency union just because it might suit the interests of an independent Scotland. To put such proposals, which are negotiating positions, to the Scottish people as a prospectus is to deny the very meaning of that word. Just a few short weeks ago, Parliament agreed unanimously that this referendum should be held, and I have said many times that I respect the right of nationalists in that regard.

The fact is that the First Minister said that the Scottish Labour Party could not deliver a pizza, never mind a Parliament, but we are sitting in a Parliament that was delivered by the United Kingdom Parliament. We will come forward with our proposals in advance of the referendum. The white paper is an important contribution to the debate. Sandra White said that she thought that it was fantastic and that she was disappointed that unionists were not prepared to say that it was fantastic, too. Christina McKelvie told us that, at the weekend, she was at a conference of radical nationalists, who made the case—

She was at a socialist conference where, as I understood, the case was made for a very different vision of an independent Scotland, because those people oppose the low-tax regime that the SNP favours.

I am sorry, but Mr Harvie took a little bit of my time and I would like to make some progress. If I have time, I will come back to Ms Fabiani. Those radical nationalists oppose the constitutional monarchy and NATO membership, which the SNP supports. On the currency, the chair of the yes campaign supports joining the euro, while the chief executive of the campaign and others within it think that an independent Scotland should consider a Scots pound. They will say anything. We are told that the white paper is the prospectus for independence and that we will negotiate not only to use the British pound but to have a sterling union with a say in the institutions that we will just have left and with the Bank of England as our lender of last resort. People in England, Wales and Northern Ireland have the right to a say in all that. They may not want a currency union with a Scotland that has just broken the existing political, social and economic union. People in the rest of the UK might look to the eurozone, pause and consider whether they want a currency arrangement with a foreign country. I am sure that they will listen to Nicola Sturgeon telling them that it is in their best interests to agree with her, but the decision will be outwith Scotland’s control. The test for the white paper was to provide certainty on the currency, but it has not done so. Why should Scots take a risk on an independent Scotland if they do not even know what currency their wages will be paid in? Those inconsistencies undermine the document and it is incumbent on those of us who do not support independence to point them out again and again.

No, thank you. We have heard a wide range of speeches in the debate—speeches on pensions, the pound, employment rights, public services and taxation. James Kelly told us that Scotland faces a housing crisis now and that the Parliament already has the powers to act, but the white paper has nothing to say about what the SNP will do, or even what it would do if it got all the powers that it wants. Yesterday’s announcement on childcare quickly fell flat because many of Scotland’s children will have completed their primary school education before the SNP gets round to delivering its previous commitment. That, too, is in a policy area that is already entirely devolved. There can be no better example of Scotland being put on pause for the referendum than the SNP’s failure to deliver the childcare promises that it made before. It will not be enough for the SNP simply to make new ones now. The motion that we debated refers to an idea that we have debated before: that the best decisions are made not on the issues, nor by people of differing views and experiences, but on the basis of where people live and come from. That is where I disagree with the nationalist case most fundamentally. There is nothing inherently progressive about Scotland, just as there is nothing inherently regressive in the people of England, Wales and Northern Ireland. It is not a partnership to suggest that we should just walk away from our collective achievements or our collective problems. That is not to deny patriotism; it is to put it in its proper place as part of the shared human experience that influences us all. That includes proximity to one another, shared heritage, shared values and shared vision. Our nationality shapes and influences those things; it does not need to define it. I have a friend who is the product of two social workers—one English and one Welsh. He is a Scot and a progressive. His values are not Scottish values, distinct because of our border. Our values are based on our experiences, the ideas instilled in us and the judgments that we make for good or ill as individual human beings and as collectives of people who form relationships with one another for a myriad of reasons, of which nationality is just one facet. It is a fiction to say that everything will be better after independence and that everything that Scots like about Britain will simply stay the same. The 90-year nationalists now tell us that they like everything about Britain that they think the people of Scotland might like about Britain. The amendment that was moved earlier says that Scotland could enjoy the best of both worlds: a strong Scottish Parliament—which could provide more childcare now—and, in the United Kingdom, the backing of one of the world’s biggest economies, with the strength to bail out our banks. That is a union of partnership, co-operation, redistribution, solidarity, sharing risk and pooling resources. It is my unionism, and that is why I urge members to support the amendment in the name of Johann Lamont. We all look forward to the debate beyond today and recognise that the people of Scotland will have the final say on the arguments in the white paper and on the question next year.

I was struck when Kevin Stewart said that people who are voting in the referendum should know what they are voting for. It is pretty fundamental that people know what currency we will have in an independent Scotland. I do not need Better Together to issue a report that explains to me that we have the pound in Britain; I have a pound in my pocket.

The problem is that the SNP argued for independence for Scotland long before the advent of this Conservative Government. To say that this is a debate about this Government is completely untrue. Mr Swinney believed in independence before the First Minister made his announcement about childcare yesterday, he believed in independence when there was a Labour Government, and the SNP believed in independence when the Labour Government of 1945 was creating the welfare state.

Does the Deputy First Minister accept that the people of England, Wales and Northern Ireland have the right to say no to a eurozone-style currency union? Is she listening and hearing the many voices from England, Wales and Northern Ireland that are saying that it is seriously unlikely?

Will the member give way?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. The minister draws attention to the efforts of the Scottish Government to protect employment. Can he indicate to the chamber why there is no employment minister, never mind any of the ministers that he mentioned, even present in the chamber for the debate? Why is the transport minister responding to this debate about employment in my region?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The announcement two weeks ago of significant job losses was not unexpected, but it remains a major blow, and it is not possible to talk about the issues raised in the motion without thinking of those who are at risk of losing their jobs. The Clyde unions and management are to be commended for the constructive way in which they are negotiating with each other in the best interests not just of the current workforce but of those who we hope will work there in the future. There is no better or more forceful advocate for the Clyde than those who work in the yards, and they should be listened to. I appreciate that Government back benchers have been handed their copy of Jamie Webster’s quote, which they have stuck to and dutifully read out during the debate. I do not disagree with Jamie Webster. In the event of a yes vote, of course we would have to get behind the Clyde yards. The problem is that I do not want to get behind them just when they are arguing for something when they are put in a difficult position; I want us to have influence over such things. That is the point that all the other union conveners have made. Others have said that the crucial issue for the success of the Clyde yards is a healthy order book. In fact, there are two issues: orders and skills. The unions will be making the case for apprentices, who have been a major source of pride for everyone who knows the Clyde yards. It is vital that training continues and that the yards continue to be seen as an attractive career choice for young people from Glasgow and far beyond, because only by maintaining skills and training new apprentices will the yards be able to take advantage of the UK’s policy of procuring UK defence ships within our borders and to build the new orders that I wish to see, among which the most crucial is the order for the type 26 global combat ship. The extra work on the Queen Elizabeth class, which is to be transferred from Portsmouth, is, as Murdo Fraser said, very welcome, as is the order for offshore patrol vessels. That work can bridge the gap in the period up to an order for the type 26. The order for the type 26 is the next major order that could and should be placed with the Clyde yards, following those for the aircraft carriers and, before them, the type 45 destroyers. Those ships, the Daring class, are in British service now, and no one who has any interest in Clyde shipbuilding will have failed to have noticed HMS Daring arriving in the Philippines this week, bringing with it much-needed UK aid for the country. I want to see HMS Daring, HMS Dauntless, HMS Diamond, HMS Dragon, HMS Defender and HMS Duncan, which were all commissioned by the previous Labour Government, joined by a new class of Clyde-built frigates that can play their role in the defence of the United Kingdom and in projecting British influence at sea—ships that Glasgow would be proud of. BAE Systems has made clear that its preference is to build those UK defence ships in Glasgow. Therefore, the single biggest threat to that order coming to Scotstoun and Govan is the loss of the yards’ status as domestic UK shipbuilders. As others have mentioned, UK yards are able to compete for the work under article 346 rules, which assist the UK to place orders for UK defence ships in the UK. I listened with interest to what Annabelle Ewing said about article 346. The provision exists so that Governments can make decisions in their own interests as member states. She rightly said that a country must be a member state to benefit from the article.

I can anticipate what Annabelle Ewing is about to say, so I do not think that I need to hear it, other than to say—[Interruption.] Okay, I give way.

I successfully anticipated what Annabelle Ewing would say. It might be technically possible for something to happen, but that does not make it likely that any Government would make a decision that was against the interests of workers in the member state, as she put it. We need a bit of realpolitik in the debate. The nationalists have tried, with little success, to convince the workers at the yards that all this will somehow not matter. It has been suggested that the Clyde yards could simply—and apparently immediately—diversify into other kinds of shipbuilding. Like Johann Lamont, I would support any intelligent ideas for new work. However, glib statements ignore the highly specialised nature of the yards as defence shipbuilders and forget that BAE Systems bought the Govan business from a Norwegian owner—Kvaerner—that tried to make exactly such a diversified business work on the Clyde. I am not clear about whether the Scottish Government has urged BAE Systems to build commercial ships such as car ferries or tankers on the Clyde, but I would be interested to know BAE’s response, given that it is a defence contractor.

If the response was not positive, can we presume that the Scottish Government believes that BAE should sell the Clyde yards to someone who might be prepared to make such a business work? The workforce is only too aware of the uncertainty that that would bring. The only other suggestion—apart from the idea that the UK should buy Scottish, regardless of whether Scotland is in the UK—is that the yards will be kept busy building a Scottish navy. The SNP amendment seeks shamelessly to divert the debate from jobs in the defence industries to Faslane. That is probably the only case of a Government trying to distract attention from significant job losses by promising even more for a different group of workers. We are told that the £163 million annual saving from Trident can be spent on building boats.

However, we are not told how many boats would be built or how they would be procured, and we already know that that money is to be spent on resurrecting the historical regiments, international development, renewable energy, higher welfare benefits, earlier pensions, tuition fees and skills and training.

I could go on, Presiding Officer—

I will respect your entreaty not to do so.

Will the member take an intervention?

Members bring a range of experiences, ideas and beliefs to the chamber, but it is always worth reminding ourselves that, although they might not always seem to do so, our debates and judgments affect how real people live their lives, the opportunities that they have and their sense of the value that society places on them. The issue of equal marriage rights was raised with me during the 2011 election campaign, when I strongly supported the references to it in my party’s manifesto. Nevertheless, I had perhaps not thought through the reasons why I felt that way about it—my response was instinctual. I was first asked my views on the issue a few days after the election and, over time, I have found myself being asked about it more and more often. As I thought more about it and listened to others expressing their views, I came to understand my own feelings about it a bit more clearly. In the course of the wider debate that led up to the introduction of the bill, I remembered someone whom I had not forgotten but the extent of whose influence on the view that I had thought was instinctual I had not realised. Like the majority of the Scottish population, I strongly support the provisions of the bill. I have also, at various times, pressed the cabinet secretary—and, indeed, his predecessor—to hurry along. Therefore, I am very pleased that we have got to this point and hope that we will follow the example of England and Wales and the many other countries that have created equal marriage. I believe that marriage rights are an issue of equality, and I feel strongly that the current position of civil partnerships, which I supported at the time and was proud of my party for having taken the lead in introducing, is not quite enough. Although there is little difference between civil partnerships and marriage in terms of legal rights, the fact that civil partnerships preclude the right of gay people of faith to commit themselves to each other in a religious service is discriminatory. I hope that one of the major achievements of the bill will be to remove that discrimination. Equality does not mean that everything must be the same; equally, difference should not be imposed on identical things. Same-sex relationships may be different from opposite-sex relationships, but are all relationships not different and unique? Do they not all share the same basic principle: love for another human being and a desire to commit to spending your life with that person? I do not think that the state has the right to draw a distinction between human partnerships that human beings do not draw themselves, and to me that is fundamentally what the bill is about and why I support it. In 2000, this Parliament repealed section 28—section 2A—which it did in advance of the rest of the UK. Looking back, we can see that the repeal of section 28 was a victory for equality, but it did not come without cost, just as the years of various discriminatory laws did not come without cost and just as that cost still exists in many parts of the world, as Joan McAlpine rightly highlighted. There are members in the chamber who will have celebrated that victory and they might also recall some of the pain of that debate: the things that were said that can never be unsaid and the people who pushed ahead and, in my view, have never been properly recognised for their efforts. When section 28 was debated by the Parliament, I was still at school—a religious school—and I recall what was said. I recall talking to classmates about the leaflets that were going through our parents’ doors, the newspaper headlines and the things that were said on the school bus. I mentioned that I thought of someone in the context of this debate. I remember a girl—a young woman—in my year at school, who one evening appeared on the TV news, which was rather unexpected. She spoke out and, to many of us, she became the first person we knew to come out. She did it by asking a very simple and powerful question: what right do others have to make a judgement about me and my life or to make a distinction about who I am and what I am? That was in the context of the section 28 debate. There are many things that I could say about the detail of the bill, and others are rightly saying them. I celebrate the fact that this may be the last major legal change required to remove discrimination against lesbian, gay and bisexual people from our law, and I am very privileged to be in this place, at this time, to support it. I will follow the amendments at stage 2 and I will support efforts to improve the bill. It is probably not the last major piece of legislation for transgender people, but it is a significant step on the way. I will oppose any change to the bill that could threaten a new section 28, however well intentioned people may be on that issue. I do not want a situation in which there is a campaign to come back to the bill because of a section that is inserted at stage 2. I do not know whether the woman that I mentioned has sent one of us an email asking us to support this legislation or if she has put her activism behind her.

However, I will vote tonight for her, as much as for any of the other good reasons—and I thank Ruth Davidson for giving a voice to those reasons. It is thanks to that woman and many people I have met in the course of this campaign that a generation of people will be able to grow up, fall in love and get married, not with the world not caring who they get married to, but with the world recognising the partnership that they make rather than differentiating their relationship. I am very grateful to support the general principles of the bill.

3. To ask the First Minister whether he will provide an update on the Scottish Government’s discussions regarding the future of the Clyde shipyards. (S4F-01674)

I thank the First Minister for his comments about those who are likely to lose their jobs and I hope that Parliament will have the opportunity to debate the issues further. On Tuesday, a United Kingdom defence minister repeated the crystal-clear position that the UK Government does not and would not procure British warships outwith the UK. I am not sure whether industrial language was used when the Deputy First Minister met the unions at the yards, but I understand that she was told the same thing in no uncertain terms. Will the First Minister now accept that, given that the Clyde yards are owned by a UK defence contractor that relies on UK defence contracts and which wants to build UK defence ships in Glasgow, the biggest threat to the Govan and Scotstoun yards building the type 26 frigates is his desire for Scotland to leave the UK?

As Lewis Macdonald said about the previous group, throughout the passage of the bill Scottish Labour has supported strong common-plan arrangements being in the bill and we have consistently argued for the maximum possible transparency in relationships and spending among organisations that may work in partnership at points of the campaign. The provisions that the Scottish Government is rightly seeking to amend apply to both sides of the debate. We do not wish to see any advantage to one side or another as a result of how the common plans are interpreted by the Electoral Commission, designated organisations or permitted participants. Concerns were expressed at stage 2 about the burden of reporting for smaller parties and other organisations, and we understand the motivation behind seeking to remove some of the burdens. We would have preferred that it had been possible to ensure that changes to that provision were subject to further scrutiny at an earlier stage, particularly as the changes were not recommended by the committee in its report. However, we recognise the concern about the issue that Patrick Harvie expressed at stage 2. Although we were not convinced by the original amendment, in the light of the comments of the Electoral Commission and others, we are content that the amendments strike a reasonable balance and will reduce the need for double reporting, which we accept would be particularly onerous for smaller parties. We will support amendments 32, 33 and 34.

Scottish Labour welcomes the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill and we will vote yes at decision time this afternoon. [Interruption.]

I fear that, after decision time, the consensus may break down. I echo the Deputy First Minister’s thanks to the various electoral professionals, to all those members of the public who engaged in the consultation and to everyone who has played a part in bringing us to this point. The time has come for the question to be settled. Scotland’s constitutional future has been key to Scottish political debate all my life. I will name no names, but some members have been advocating the end of the union for even longer than that. No doubt, they are as keen as the rest of us to decide the matter once and for all. The choice is either a separate Scotland or a continuing partnership with our nearest neighbours, the people with whom we share these islands and together with whom we have built the institutions that act as levellers in our society—our welfare state, our national health service and many of the things that people all over Britain are proud of. In many cases, those achievements have been won by a Labour movement across the United Kingdom, and we have no intention of either walking away from our collective achievements or abandoning others to face our collective problems alone. As I have said before, I respect the right of nationalists to put the case for independence and the referendum provides an opportunity for us to make a positive choice, whether that is for independence from the UK or for partnership in the UK. Following the passing of the bill, it will be our responsibility alongside others to ensure that, while the political arguments are contested as the Deputy First Minister said, we treat each other as fellow Scots, each side pursuing its arguments in the interest of what we believe to be best for our country. On this side, we believe that Scotland enjoys the best of both worlds. Decisions are made here on many of the day-to-day issues that concern voters most but, alongside that, we can share risk and resources between people to create a better society not just for Scots, but for all the people of Britain. Up to now, the debate has concentrated on process issues such as when the referendum will be held, who will vote and even who will debate with whom on television. With the exception of the latter point, we are now past that stage. We all look forward to the white paper, as there is a need for answers on the issues of substance. What would our currency be? If we are to retain the UK pound rather than, as used to be argued, adopt the euro—or introduce a Scots pound, as I am sure some on the Scottish National Party benches would prefer—how would that work without a pact between London and Edinburgh? On both Europe and pensions, the SNP’s position has been asserted many times but then contradicted almost as often. On energy markets, financial regulation, the benefits system, defence and even the monarchy, the SNP’s position has changed to such an extent that even the nationalists now argue for partnership with the UK.

I am happy to confirm to Mr Mason, if he is confused, that the best way to keep the pound in the pockets of the people of Scotland is to remain in the United Kingdom. The 2011 election and the Edinburgh agreement between the UK and Scottish Governments paved the way for this legislation. As an Opposition, despite our different position on the constitution, we have engaged with the Scottish Government constructively. We have welcomed Nicola Sturgeon’s answers to our questions about the position of 16 and 17-year-olds living abroad with forces families. It is to the credit of both the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee and the Government that a solution to that issue has been found. We have raised concerns about the common plan arrangements because we, too, want the campaign to be regulated to the highest international standards. Although we did not quite reach agreement on all the stage 3 amendments this afternoon, I welcome the Scottish Government’s acceptance of our stage 2 amendment, which prescribes a role for the Electoral Commission in providing guidance to the lead campaigners on the provisions of the bill. I understand that the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee will meet shortly to consider secondary legislation arising from the Scottish Independence Referendum (Franchise) Act 2013. It would be remiss not to thank the committee’s convener, members and clerks, as well as the Government and its officials, for the work that the committee has done to date. When the Deputy First Minister responds to the debate, can she perhaps say whether she believes that the committee could have a continued role in scrutinising the white paper? As the white paper will be ministers’ prospectus for a separate Scotland, it is vital that the Scottish Parliament has the opportunity to interrogate the issues properly. Does she believe that the Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee and other committees—or, indeed, a special white paper committee—should lead that task by taking evidence from experts on what the SNP is proposing? We hope that the white paper will address many issues in more detail than has been the case up till now. One such issue is the situation of the Clyde yards, which to my mind goes to the heart of the independence debate and the Scottish Government’s approach to it. Despite the fact that the nationalists have been campaigning for a separate Scotland for nearly 90 years, they seem to have given little thought to some of the practical repercussions of their position. It seems to me that either they take the view that the jobs involved in building UK defence ships on the Clyde are a price worth paying for breaking up Britain, in which case they should be honest about that, or they believe that those workers can and should be redeployed on some other task, in which case they are duty bound to put forward a plan that is robust and open to scrutiny.

Actually, the previous Labour Government had a proud record on bringing work to the Clyde. However, we are more than happy to debate the issue of diversification of the order books of the Clyde yards. Given that both the Govan and Scotstoun yards are not only owned by a defence contractor but build defence ships, I would be interested to hear whether the Deputy First Minister put the case to BAE Systems that the yards should diversify their business into other types of ships and what response BAE Systems made to that. In the wider debate, asking questions should not be viewed as a negative thing to do, so it is disappointing that, when an academic spoke out this week to express his view, a Scottish Government minister contacted his boss to complain. [Interruption.] SNP members may groan about that, but they should be embarrassed by the conduct of that minister. This debate can and should be better than that. Rules and regulations such as those that we are debating in the bill will not, on their own, ensure good conduct of the campaign; nor will it be of any use for enforcement of those rules to take place afterwards, because this is a vote that no one would wish to see rerun. I have mentioned that the debate has been central to Scottish politics all my life, which is why I support settling the matter next year. In the meantime, we do not want to see government exist only as a campaign. The Government has the power to change people’s lives in the here and now; it should not put Scotland on pause to concentrate only on independence because—[Interruption.]

In the meantime, people face challenges that are the responsibility of this Government—not after 2014 or 2016 but today and every day leading up to 18 September. I think that my constituents accept that the Government has a particular constitutional ambition, but they do not accept that their everyday concerns are secondary to it, and neither do they believe in the convenience of every answer to every problem that Scots face just happening to be independence. The choice facing Scotland next year is one between separation and partnership, independence and union. It does not matter what terms we use, but it does matter that the question that the bill provides for does not crowd out all the other issues to which answers need to be found. Scotland is an old nation but the United Kingdom is still a young country. There is no inevitability in the progressiveness of one or the limitations of the other. To suggest as the yes campaign has up to now—the Deputy First Minister repeated this suggestion—that the UK is somehow uniquely incapable of change or progress is wrong. I fully believe that the people of Scotland will vote no next year not because they are against change or progress, but because change and progress are achieved not by a constitution but by people working together. On this side, we look forward to the people having their say.

Will the member give way?

Will the Deputy First Minister give way?

I actually referred to independence and separation and made a point about language, but the main thing that I tried to cover in my speech was the tone of the debate. As to how I could ever be persuaded by the Deputy First Minister’s case, does she regret referring to her fellow Scot Alistair Carmichael as “the Secretary of State against Scotland”? Will we hear more of that in the campaign?

Will the minister give way?

Will Stewart Stevenson give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

More often than the external impression might be, we have consensual debates in the chamber, but it is still rare for us to have a debate in which it is possible to say that we have agreed with every single word that every other member said. That will allow me to be brief, Presiding Officer, and not repeat too many of the points that have already been made. I thank Stewart Maxwell for his confession about not being able to attend the 40th anniversary celebration event. I was in a similar boat myself and was hugely disappointed not to go. I am hugely embarrassed to have to confess that in front of three Labour colleagues who do an awful lot of work on the issue. I agree with what Sandra White said about Glasgow Women’s Aid because, like Stewart Maxwell, I had the opportunity to visit its premises earlier in the year and discuss more of the day-to-day work that it does. I congratulate her on securing the debate and ensuring that the Parliament has the opportunity to congratulate everyone involved with Glasgow Women’s Aid. I do not want to repeat the points that others have made, but simply to agree with, and reinforce, what Jackie Baillie said about the issue representing a power abuse. It is an issue of gender relationships, gender roles and, ultimately, gender violence. The debate offers us an opportunity to reflect on how far we have come since the establishment of women’s refuges throughout the country. We have made huge progress. We no longer regard an incident as being a domestic and, therefore, something that does not concern the rest of us. As Sandra White said, 5,000 women and children still in contact with the service is a huge number, so we should not pat ourselves on the back too much that the work is finished. However, there is a positive here that we can aim for, because there is another side to the issue. Stewart Maxwell and others touched on that aspect in relation to other crimes, particularly of sexual violence, where it remains a big job for us to challenge and change attitudes. I am talking about what young people—and others—say about non-domestic relationships between men and women, and the view that when a sexual crime is committed against a woman, it is possible that the victim is to blame for it. Jackie Baillie mentioned a few of the contributory factors, which include things as simple as the perception that the way in which someone is dressed gives people—predominantly men—the right to make judgments about them and therefore to commit behaviours that in any other circumstance would be beyond them. There is a story in what we have achieved through Scottish Women’s Aid, which should influence how we deal with that wider issue in society. I congratulate Glasgow Women’s Aid on everything that it has achieved and look forward to the minister saying a bit more about the wider policy work that is going on. We sometimes get debates in which we celebrate the anniversaries of great things that are going on, and I hope that we get further such opportunities during this session of Parliament. Given the minister’s appointment, I am sure that she will be keen to debate these policy issues, and any associated issues, for other women’s organisations.

Mr Swinney and Iain Gray mentioned the sacrifice of the workforce to secure the continued operation of the plant, and to secure not just existing jobs but the hope of jobs for others in the future. The minister referred to £9 million in regional selective assistance and said that it would be paid provided that employment conditions that have already been agreed continue to be satisfied. Can he say a bit more about what that statement encompasses? Can he indicate whether the conditions attached to RSA in this case differ significantly from RSA that might have been provided in the past?

11. To ask the Scottish Government what discussions it has with the UK Government regarding economic development programmes. (S4O-02482)

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the call that is being made by Glasgow City Council for a greater role for local authorities in economic development and the proposal that both the UK and Scottish Governments should work together with the council and other local authorities in the region to develop a city deal for Glasgow similar to those agreed for comparable cities in England. Does the cabinet secretary support such an approach, which recognises the importance of city regions as major drivers of the Scottish and United Kingdom economies?

I congratulate Jackie Baillie, as others have done, on securing the debate. I very much agree with Mr Mason on the issue of pay ratios and differentials. In her closing speech, I would be interested to hear the minister touch on a commitment to measure, which is the one thing that we could do now. A commitment from the public sector to produce some statistics on pay ratios might help us to deliver the outcome that Mr Mason suggested. Challenge poverty week is an excellent initiative. I congratulate the Poverty Alliance and everyone who has been involved in developing the idea. John Mason mentioned the importance of Christian teaching and what the church says on some of these issues. Last year, I was struck by a comment that Sally Foster-Fulton of the Church of Scotland made to me. She said that the Christian view that the poor are always with us is not meant to be a defence; it is supposed to be a challenge. In the policy debate on poverty and how to tackle it, we often create the distinction between absolute and relative poverty, which Alex Johnstone mentioned. Jackie Baillie mentioned the progress that the previous Labour Government made on both. There is reasonable political consensus that eradication of absolute poverty is achievable in a country with our wealth and resources, and that we should seek to export that campaign against absolute poverty to other corners of the globe. Our politics, however, tend to divide us on relative poverty. To some extent, that division reflects the differing views of the public at large. There are those who are prepared to accept the inevitability of some poverty for other people, but people are rarely persuaded to accept the inevitability of poverty for themselves or their families. If we accept the inevitability of poverty, we must divide “others” into those who deserve our support and those who deserve their fate. The opportunity provided by challenge poverty week will play an important role in encouraging us all to reject that approach. I will concentrate on poverty as it affects the people in Glasgow, whom I represent. Glasgow is not a poor city in many respects. The city council rightly promotes Glasgow as the powerhouse of the Scottish economy; its success is vital to the city region and all of Scotland. Quite often, the debate about Glasgow’s problems, particularly in the media but sometimes in the political debate around the city’s leadership, depicts a city that is a victim of poverty rather than a survivor of it. Rather than list the many challenges that Glasgow faces, which are deep rooted, and the solutions that have been presented, which are often superficial and can be patronising, I will make a couple of observations. Due to the scale of the challenge that Glasgow faces, I do not believe that it is possible to have a serious plan to tackle poverty in Scotland without having a serious commitment to Glasgow. That is not to say that the lived experience of poverty in Glasgow is worse than it is elsewhere, or that poverty in Scotland is unique to Glasgow; rather, it is to recognise that in the big areas—health, life expectancy, education and quality of work, all of which add up to quality of life—the scale of Glasgow represents a capacity to intervene that we cannot ignore and the biggest opportunity to turn our faces against the idea that poverty is inevitable. I have spoken about my city but another point that should be at the heart of challenge poverty week is the importance of individual human voices in establishing what is to be done. I care about poverty in my city and it is part of my job to advocate on behalf of the people whom I represent. We can all put in place programmes to assist people. However, it is only when we hear the voices of people who have the lived experience of worklessness—whether because of the lack of a job or because they are unable to work—or who face exploitation at work that we will ever sustain real change. In yesterday’s cost of living debate, which has been mentioned, Iain Gray talked about the missing £1 billion—the money that has vanished from anti-poverty programmes since 2007. From the conversations that I have had with poverty campaigners, I know that there is a feeling that we have lost our focus on tackling poverty. I might not support many of the changes to the welfare system that UK Government is pursuing or some of the Scottish Government’s priorities, but those are not the causes of poverty. We will get an understanding of the real causes and solutions and how to scrutinise the budgets only when the voices of the people who are affected are heard properly in the debate. I very much hope that challenge poverty week presents an opportunity for that to happen.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s commitment to ensuring that those who have missed appointments are seen as quickly as possible. Will that be done on the basis of one offer or as many offers as it takes? Clearly, people need to plan and sometimes to rearrange their lives in order to attend hospital appointments. In the event that someone is offered a new appointment quickly, as the cabinet secretary suggested, but is unable to take it up, will they be able to continue to liaise with the health board to get the appointment as soon as possible, rather than being put at the back of the queue?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am grateful to the minister for coming back to me. There is something that I would like the minister to help me with. I thought that the position of the Scottish National Party was that the council tax was a regressive tax. How does freezing a regressive tax make it progressive?

Will the member give way?

The action that the previous Labour Government took was to reduce child poverty. It is nonsensical of SNP members to pretend that that somehow did not happen. In recent weeks and months, a number of people have said to me that Scottish politics is dominated by the on-going referendum debate. Indeed, the Scottish Government has used time in the chamber in recent weeks to debate the one-year-to-go point until Scots have their say on that question. No one on the Labour side underestimates the importance of the referendum, but I think that, across the chamber, we would all regret any impression that the Parliament is not focused on the day-to-day issues that affect the lives of people whom we represent. I hope that this Labour debate goes some way towards redressing the balance. The cost of living crisis that is hitting households across Scotland and the UK is the issue that dominated my surgeries this summer. Lynn is a woman who came to a surgery that I held in Partick, and her story is fairly typical of many people I have met. She was forced to give up her work as a supervisor in a busy shop to care for her elderly mother. Lynn’s mum unfortunately died in January, and since then Lynn has been unable to find another job—and I mean any other job. Lynn did the right thing by caring for her mum herself—she saved the state money—but now she feels that she is being punished, and life is getting harder for her each and every month. We know that the impact of the global financial crash and recession has been felt the hardest and longest by those who are furthest removed from the questions of financial regulation. It has been bank workers and not bank executives who have felt the most pain. Those who have lost their jobs in banking, manufacturing and retail and the 49,000 people who have lost their jobs in public services have suffered. Those who were already furthest from the labour market have been penalised heavily, and even for those who are in work, exploitation has been the hallmark of the recovery, such as it is. Zero-hours contracts, reduced hours and pay freezes have been the reward for many of those who are in work, while those who are looking for a job have been encouraged or in some cases compelled to provide their labour without pay. At best, that means people having less money in their purses and wallets, putting off home moves or improvements and missing out on holidays, but at worst it means people struggling to clothe their children for the new school term and to put food on the table. At the same time, we have seen childcare become less and less affordable, and it is now less affordable in Scotland than in any other part of the United Kingdom. Prices have risen in the shops and on our household bills. Despite falls in wholesale energy prices, the cost of heating a home this winter will take up a larger and larger proportion of incomes. When it comes to a basket of essentials in the supermarket, the JRF has put the rise in what is paid at the till at some 25 per cent over just five years, as I think Jackie Baillie said. Demand for food banks has risen by 35 per cent in the same period, and a fifth of those who access them are in work. Since 2010, average wages in Scotland have fallen by £27.30 a week. Public sector workers are emerging from a pay freeze with a 1 per cent increase, or 2 per cent for those who already earn the least, and yet the CPI is at 2.8 per cent and the RPI is at 3.3 per cent. Declining incomes and rising costs add up to a cost-of-living crisis for real people and not just a problem or an opportunity for politicians. The question for the Scottish Parliament is how we respond and how we use the powers that the people have entrusted to us to act in their interests. All the political parties are thinking about how we will respond to those problems after the referendum or after the next election, but the crisis is not a challenge of tomorrow. It is one for today, and our response should be an urgent one. That is where I take issue with the Scottish Government’s amendment, because the truth is that the Scottish Government has nothing new to say. What we have heard is a restatement of polices that were debated during the 2007 election or policies that were introduced by the previous Labour-led Government before 2007. We need to evaluate what is already being done in terms of the regulation of costs, and spending to help people. We must consider whether those things are working or whether some effects of the policies are unintended or contrary to our objectives and whether reprioritisation is possible or needed. We also need to set out what more could and should be done. There are plenty of things that we should be doing, including extending the living wage, taking action on zero-hours contracts and making the case for training that leads to better quality work. Those steps are all vital and I agree with what has already been said about them. An answer to a parliamentary question that I received, which was published in yesterday’s written answers report, states that no assessment has been made of how extensively zero-hours contracts are being used in colleges and universities, which are some of the biggest employers in the city that I represent. There has been no assessment of whether they are primarily used for teaching and academic staff or whether it is cleaners, technicians, maintenance workers and cooks in canteens who are on them. If we do not even know how many people are being asked to work in a university without knowing how many hours they might get next week, what hope do we have of creating decent employment in other sectors of the economy? Fuel poverty, which others have mentioned, is significantly the responsibility of the Scottish Government, and its commitment to tackling the issue is regularly extolled. I welcome every penny that is spent on helping the one in three Scots who live in fuel poverty. However, one of the first decisions to be taken after the election that brought me here was to cut the fuel poverty budget and to remove universal provision of the central heating programme—universal provision which SNP members have praised in other areas. I finish by mentioning a policy that was announced at the Labour conference last week—Labour’s proposal to freeze energy bills. Would the SNP support the next Labour Government on that or would it implement a similar plan in an independent Scotland? That is the key question in this debate. Members know my views and those of other Labour members on the SNP’s plans to cut corporation tax for big businesses. Will the minister tell us, in closing, how the SNP can justify cutting tax for energy companies while taking no action on the bills that they demand of their customers? If the question cannot be answered in this debate, I am afraid that it will become a big issue in the run-up to the referendum on 18 September next year.

I am interested in what the member said. Will he say whether that is Scottish National Party policy? At what level would the SNP set the minimum wage?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

The point is that the proposal for a bedroom tax on social tenants was presented to the Labour Government and explicitly ruled out.

On that very point, did the Scottish Government not attempt to suggest yesterday that an earlier retirement age could be afforded without providing any evidence of how that would be paid for? How can the Deputy First Minister determine that something is affordable without knowing what it would cost? Specifically on the £6 billion figure that has been quoted by experts and which the Deputy First Minister has described as exaggerated, how does she know that a figure is exaggerated if she has no figure in mind?

9. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde regarding the filling of vacant positions. (S4O-02390)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer. I hope that he will be aware of figures that have been released by Unison that indicate that vacancies at NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde are at an all-time high; Unison estimates that the board is short of some 1,800 staff. Will the cabinet secretary agree to meet representatives of Unison to discuss the concerns of front-line health service workers, and will he instruct the board at his meeting in November to fill every vacancy as quickly as possible in order to avoid further detriment to my constituents, whose quality of care is being affected by short staffing?

Can Linda Fabiani tell me of a redistributive policy of the current Scottish Government or of the SNP after independence.

I am sure that Linda Fabiani read the JRF report with interest and is aware that the JRF explicitly said that the debate on independence should not put off a debate about the powers of the Scottish Government that could be used to tackle child poverty, and indicated that the Government had failed to do so.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I congratulate Cameron Buchanan on his thoughtful contribution—particularly his sincere tribute to our late colleague, Mr McLetchie. One would be forgiven for having the impression that every single day in a separate Scotland would be an historic day, but I am not sure that history will long remember this debate, because the truth is that we have heard nothing new this afternoon. We welcome this milestone in the referendum debate not just as a chance to vindicate our party politics but because it represents one year until the Scottish people have their chance to decide on the independence question. The choice facing the people of Scotland is whether to go it alone or continue working together with the people of England, Wales and Northern Ireland. They are our partners as well as our neighbours and we have built the United Kingdom together. On the Labour side, the solidarity and partnership that we have with the rest of the British Labour movement are important to us and we know that our greatest achievements—the welfare state, our national health service and our commitment to international development—are achievements that progressive people in every part of the UK have achieved together. Devolution—the Scottish Parliament—was achieved not only by pressure within Scotland but because legislation was passed in the UK Parliament that reflected our desire for effective home rule and a continuing partnership across the whole of the country. It is not devolution that is broken; rather it is this Scottish Government, which is failing to put the people’s priorities at the heart of this Parliament’s business. Under the SNP, Scotland is on pause. It is the SNP that seeks to denigrate devolution—to focus not on what this Parliament can do for Scotland but on the grievances of nationalists against the rest of Britain.

I welcome Mr McDonald’s sandwich heckling in these debates. We enjoyed his loudness at the beginning but perhaps he could have contributed to the debate if he has something to say at the end. Last week, we had a budget for independence that failed to set out a plan for growing jobs and our economy. The week before, we had a legislative programme that showed the SNP’s lack of ambition, holding Scotland back because it thinks that undermining Scotland’s confidence in devolution is the only way in which it could ever convince enough Scots to take a chance with separation. It is therefore no surprise that we have heard the usual litany of complaints from the SNP this afternoon—other than from Christine Grahame, who must win some kind of positivity prize at the SNP Christmas party this year. We reject the notion that the union must be broken to bring about the change that we would wish to see in our country, either here in Scotland or in the rest of Britain. The question, as many members across the chamber have said, is not whether Scotland could be an independent country but whether it wants to be. As Malcolm Chisholm said, we believe in the best of both worlds: a strong Scottish Parliament that is focused on Scotland’s priorities and a strong United Kingdom in which we share and pool both our resources and the risks that we face together. We have said this afternoon that we welcome the people of Scotland—not just Scotland’s politicians—having their say on this question next year. It is the people who are demanding information about the SNP’s plans for a separate Scotland and it is the people whom the nationalists need to convince.

I have no disagreement with Ms MacDonald on that point. We need, therefore, to move beyond the point where, every time someone raises a question, they are accused of scaremongering. [Interruption.] I apologise, Presiding Officer; I seem to have inadvertently hit the button that activates the chips on SNP back benchers’ shoulders. So far, the signs that the SNP is rising to the challenge of its own objective are not encouraging. Scottish ministers have been caught out saying one thing about independence in private and something else entirely in public. Deficits are turned into relative surpluses and legal advice on EU membership is asserted to exist on television, only for it to turn out that it was not even commissioned at that point. The imagination of the SNP in bending what independence means and has always meant to some of the contributors to the debate to mean something else entirely knows no bounds of principle or practicality. The party that trumpeted its disarmament credentials when its policies were not subject to scrutiny now wishes to shelter under NATO’s nuclear umbrella—so long as someone else holds up the umbrella for it. Former republicans now reassure Scots of a royalist persuasion that they want a monarchical union with England. Bob Doris (Glasgow) (SNP) rose— Welfare arrangements can be shared while at the same time being transformed to reflect undefined Scottish values. Linda Fabiani again completely failed to define what those values might mean.

The continual reassessment of the limits of independence by its longest-standing supporters reflects a desire not to lead Scots to voting yes, but to wear them down. Bob Doris rose—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. In the past year, we have witnessed a Scottish Government saying anything that will help its case, no matter whether that reflects its real views or would actually damage Scotland rather than help it. The Bank of England is to be Scotland’s lender of last resort, yet Scotland is to have no say in setting the interest rates of Scots with mortgages to pay. We have had no answers on pension arrangements after independence, and we are expected to support financial regulation being made in London, while at the same time withdrawing our representation from the places where decisions are made. The SNP is presenting not so much a vision for Scotland as a case for itself. On the Labour side, we have presented our view that, while devolution is essential for Scotland, union and partnership are needed too. We hope and believe that Scotland makes that choice for itself next year. The choice that we face is not Scotland versus England; the debate this afternoon has been between Scots on what the best future is for Scotland. During the debate, Labour members have questioned the assertion in the motion that only independence can solve inequality. That flies in the face of evidence that I heard when I was a member of the Health and Sport Committee from Kate Pickett, who knows a thing or two about equality in this country. She said that it was the duty of decision makers at every level to make policy that sought to reduce inequality, and she was clear that there is no silver-bullet power or policy that solves those problems. The most progressive decisions are taken by the most progressive people; where they live has nothing whatever to do with it. Ken Macintosh was correct to point out that the SNP’s decimation of the college sector does not help, and when the Scottish Government turns this place into a talking shop to avoid defending the decisions that it has taken itself, that does not help either. A bonus for big business, with tax competition for corporations, will not help Scotland any more than it will help people in the rest of the UK, who will all lose out as a result.

I assume that Mr McDonald was not convinced of the case for independence by the welfare policies of the current Scottish Government. That is the fallacy behind the case that the SNP is presenting. I am pretty sure that Mr McDonald supported independence as the answer to every policy question that Scotland—and the rest of the UK—faces long before the election of the current Conservative Government, and I remind members that the First Minister advised people in Scotland to vote Liberal Democrat. No one in the debate—not even Neil Findlay—put it any better than the much-quoted Professor Stiglitz, when he said: “Some of you have been told that lowering tax rates”—

Certainly, Presiding Officer—I will leave Professor Stiglitz for another day. Over the years, independence has been the SNP’s answer, whatever the question. Now that it is the people’s turn to ask the questions, the SNP’s independence answer sounds less and less convincing. The amendment that Johann Lamont has lodged recognises that it is the people who should be at the heart of the debate, and it is they who will take the decision. We look forward to their positive endorsement of Scotland’s place in the union and a strong Scottish Parliament in a strong United Kingdom.

Will the minister give way?

I, too, thank all those who have been involved in the preparation of the stage 1 report that is before us, as outlined by the Deputy First Minister and including the individuals who were mentioned by the convener. Last week, the Scottish Government’s legislative programme was announced. Given the centrality of the referendum to Parliament’s business in the remainder of 2013-14, it is no surprise that stage 1 consideration of the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill has come before us so quickly; nor is it a surprise that the bill is so fulsomely supported by members of the governing party. The rest of the Scottish Government may be on pause, but the long road to the referendum provides few resting places. Indeed, Labour supports the need to get fair ground rules for the referendum established now. We welcome the people having their say on Scotland’s future, either outside the UK or as part of a continuing partnership with the people of England, Wales and Northern Ireland. We, too, will support the bill at stage 1 because, as Bruce Crawford says, we agree that despite our differing views on the answer, this question should be put and settled next year. The referendum campaign has already been described as the longest political campaign that Scotland has seen—and hopefully will ever see. For any who are already weary, it is worth remembering that Labour’s referendum, which created this Scottish Parliament, took just two months to organise and devolution occurred within just two years. However, this referendum is different from the referendum of 1997. We are clear that the end of the UK is not, as the Deputy First Minister suggested, a development of power sharing within the UK; it is an entirely different idea. Members will no doubt expand on that difference during the debate. Perhaps they will reflect the new-found enthusiasm of the First Minister, who spent the summer expounding on his love of all things British: the Queen, the pound, a shared welfare system, and a defence partnership are just some of the ever-growing number of British unions that the SNP now wants to save from itself. The purpose of the Scottish Independence Referendum Bill is to establish the ground rules for how the debate will be conducted next year. Both the yes and no camps have made it clear that we hope for a clear and decisive result—but we can only hope that the people deliver such a result. If the result is close, it is even more important that we achieve consensus now about the rules to be followed. The referendum bill is rooted in rights and responsibilities that are enshrined elsewhere in electoral law and, as others have said, in our previous experience of referendums in this country. However, this contest is different from all previous votes. Questions over expense returns, proper accounting and the duty to behave with respect towards our opponents cannot be left to be adjudicated upon afterwards. Unlike in other elections, electoral courts, the enforcement of electoral law and the ultimate sanction against rule breaking—rerunning a contest—cannot be options in this debate. The safeguards must be built into the contest in advance. Guidance or, if needed, enforcement of the rules must take place before polling day, not after it. The Referendum (Scotland) Bill Committee’s stage 1 report raises a number of issues that will need to be considered further at stage 2 because, by stage 3, we will need to be satisfied that we have given the Electoral Commission the tools to do the job that Scotland needs it to do. On the requirements of purdah, the committee correctly highlights the difficulty that has been created by the Scottish Government’s desire for Parliament to sit next August, during the purdah period. That is a problem, first, because of the significance of the decision and, secondly, because of the danger of the Government completing its transformation into a campaign. I am sure that it is not the intention of anyone in the Government to hold a First Minister’s question time on that Thursday in purdah, in which the leader of the Government is barred from providing substantive answers, nor is it intended that his words might not be publishable under restrictions affecting the production of an Official Report, which would be a potential outcome if the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body was included in the bill.

The Government also chose the date of the referendum. The key point is that we have a bill before us, and we now have to scrutinise the rules that it creates to ensure that they work. The upcoming by-election in the Dunfermline constituency represents a prompt test for the Scottish Government to respect the rules that apply to Government activity during elections in spirit as well as to the letter.

There should be no problem at all, then. Perhaps the Deputy First Minister will indicate later in the debate whether she thinks that it would be appropriate for the white paper on independence to be published during the campaign. The bill proposes that lead campaigns will be formally designated only during the 16-week regulated period. We support the Electoral Commission’s view that that should happen as soon as possible. We know that Yes Scotland and Better Together will be the lead campaign organisations, so there is no need to delay, and we welcome the Deputy First Minister’s commitment to amendment on that issue. The bill does not deal with the franchise for the referendum, but the Deputy First Minister raised that matter. The outstanding issue on which Parliament still needs an answer is whether 16 and 17-year-olds living abroad with forces families will have the same voting rights as their parents or possibly their cousins living here. Our view is that no number of votes should ever be considered negligible, and that a solution for those young people must be found. Spending limits are a fraught issue in any election, and all elections cost money, but it is important that the rules apply equally and have an impact that is fair for both sides. A decision of this importance should not be hampered by artificially low limits, any more than we would wish there to be unrestricted spending. However, we have real concerns, which were expressed in evidence to the committee, about the interaction of lead campaigns and local or affiliated groups and the possibility of moving money or other resources between them to get round the limits. For lead campaigns, the limit is relatively low, whereas for other groups it seems fairly high. The transparency of relationships between lead campaigns and other permitted participants must be improved if we are to have groups that are linked to a lead campaign but which have apparently not been declared to be formally part of it. Everyone welcomes initiatives by both campaigns to engage with particular groups of voters, whether they be businesses, trade unions, women, or minority or lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender groups. However, it is crucial that their funding and relationship to the lead campaign is clear and beyond further questioning all the way to referendum day.

That is not what I am suggesting. The point of ground rules is that they apply equally to both sides; that is why we must get them right. The Parliament should consider whether an overall spending limit that included the lead campaign and permitted participants on either side of the contest would be a better way to prevent the possibility of gaming and allow for flexibility and an inclusive contest. As I said, the bill is about establishing the ground rules for the debate, but there is also a duty for participants to behave in a way that recognises that trust is earned and not provided for in an act of Parliament. We want a debate in which both sides can be robust in putting their position and scrutinising the alternative. The public demand is for information that can help them establish the questions that they have and evaluate the answers that they are given. People know that each side is trying to persuade them of its case, and they will come to their own judgments about what information and arguments to value and which to discard, provided that the ground rules of debate, which they expect, are respected. Unfortunately, this summer the ground rules have not always been respected to the extent that we would wish. We have seen payment for a supposedly independent article that was placed in a newspaper without qualification. Many of us will have spent the summer knocking on doors and putting our case for what we each believe, but few of us will have done that while dressed up as the other side. The spectacle of elected Scottish National Party representatives as well as other members and supporters unfurling their Labour for independence banners represented a farce that demeaned the debate over the summer. [Interruption.]

Without acknowledgement that those tactics let them down, there will continue to be questions.

No, thank you. I need to make progress. Why was the press conference of the Labour for independence group paid for by the yes campaign? If yes supporters cannot bring themselves to accept that that was a mistake, perhaps they can at least suggest to Blair Jenkins that their money might be better spent on putting their own case. The test for the bill is whether it represents a fair set of ground rules for a debate that is on-going and which will only get more intense. So far, the polls continue to support our belief that most Scots continue to believe in Britain and a partnership with our neighbours, rather than leaving the country that we have built together. However, we are not complacent about the final result or the job that we have to do in the year ahead. Despite the First Minister’s summer tour to the Isle of Man and elsewhere, we understand that the best way to keep the pound, safeguard our pensions and have a say in our mortgage interest rates is not just to be part of an economic, monetary, social and political union but to be represented in it. We agree that the defence of our shores is a burden that is best borne together, but we will also campaign against the remaining aspects of separation that the SNP still supports, such as tax competition, which will lead to nothing but a race to the bottom, damaging not just Scots but all the people of Britain.

No, thank you. We have come a long way from the issues of process and the wording of the question, which dominated the early debate. The bill is an important milestone, but the decision itself is too important to be left open to further challenge. Whether or not we like the result on 18 September next year, it will be our job to come together afterwards. That will happen only if we have ground rules that are agreed in the bill and which are both fair and respected by all.

Will the member give way?

Is the Deputy First Minister’s definition of a Labour supporter mutually exclusive of SNP councillors?

6. To ask the Scottish Government which police stations are being considered for closure or a reduction in counter opening hours in Police Scotland’s review of police station service delivery. (S4O-02367)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that comprehensive answer, including the information on using social media for reporting crime. Over the summer, the chief constable wrote to members about Police Scotland’s review of the number and opening hours of police counters in police stations. The chief constable specifically highlighted the budget that he has been given by Mr MacAskill. Given the concerns about backfilling, which have been well aired in the Parliament on previous occasions, can the cabinet secretary confirm whether any Glasgow police stations are on a list for reduced services? Can he tell us what his priorities are, since they appear to be neither the back room nor the front counter?

5. To ask the Scottish Government in what year it anticipates an oil fund could be set up in an independent Scotland. (S4O-02326)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer—although he did not provide us with a better answer than the Deputy First Minister managed on Radio Scotland yesterday. Does the cabinet secretary at least accept that tax revenues from the North Sea cannot be spent twice in an independent Scotland, any more than they can be in any other country? Given the conflicting views that have so far been expressed by Scottish ministers on the matter, will he tell us now whether he plans to take money from public services to pay into an oil fund while Scotland remains in deficit?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made on college mergers in Glasgow. (S4O-02296)

Can the cabinet secretary say how many extra places will be available for prospective college students in Glasgow as a result of the mergers?

When I spoke to my constituents at the drop-in session this afternoon, they asked whether there would be any heckling in the debate—in fact, they encouraged it—but, unfortunately, consensus has broken out. Like other members, I thank James Kelly for bringing the debate to the chamber and I thank the Parkinson’s UK campaigners for coming along to the Parliament to put their case. As we have heard, up to 100 people are diagnosed with Parkinson’s every year. It is a progressive, fluctuating neurological condition that can affect all aspects of daily life. The severity of the symptoms can fluctuate from day to day and can change rapidly during the course of the day. As Margo MacDonald said, there is no cure for the condition and probably not enough research has been done on it. James Kelly said that one person in every 500 has Parkinson’s, which is about 10,000 people across Scotland. As the Scottish population ages, the prevalence of Parkinson’s will increase. Parkinson’s UK estimates that the number of people with the condition will increase by 20 per cent by 2020. However, we should remember that not everyone is diagnosed with Parkinson’s in later life. One constituent to whom I spoke at this afternoon’s drop-in session was diagnosed at 35, after five years of being tested for other conditions. Nanette Milne is right that the Parkinson’s UK report gives many examples of the great work that Parkinson’s nurses do across Scotland. I suspect that not least among them is Jackie at the Lightburn hospital in Glasgow’s east end, who explained to me much of what I have just said. There is good provision in Glasgow in some respects, but it is not good enough, although it is perhaps better in some areas. I know that Jackie has a case load of about 450 patients. I express my gratitude for the work that the nurses carry out to make the lives of patients and their families better. At what must be a stressful time, the nurses provide specialised care and support for families who receive a Parkinson’s diagnosis. About one in four people in Scotland with Parkinson’s is admitted to hospital at least once a year. More than half those admissions are unplanned, and one in every 10 people with Parkinson’s is classified as being at high risk of hospital admission in the next year. However, as I and, I am sure, other members heard this afternoon, Parkinson’s nurses can help people to avoid and reduce hospital stays and the risks that are associated with them. The nurses are trained to identify risks and they can intervene early to prevent crisis admission. They can also support patients—for example, with their medication—once they are admitted. The Parkinson’s nurse team for NHS Ayrshire and Arran estimates that, over 18 months, it has prevented 15 hospital admissions of people with Parkinson’s by intervening early, which is a saving of approximately £39,000. Parkinson’s nurses can support hospital discharges—that ensures that patients move back home with appropriate care plans in place and thereby reduces the risk of readmission. People with Parkinson’s might need medication six or seven times a day or, as I heard this afternoon, up to 10 times a day. As with any condition, missed medication can be serious. The report found that Parkinson’s nurses have used innovative ways to prevent adverse medication incidents. For example, in Dumfries and Galloway, a daily email alerts system has been set up that highlights the admission of a person with Parkinson’s to hospital. In Lothian, the nurses have developed an e-module that outlines the importance of giving medication on time. My health board—NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde—has eight specialist nurses, who work across the board area. The report highlights how the Glasgow nurses have developed joint clinics with mental health services to address cognitive and mental health symptoms. Those joint clinics have led to a more efficient use of mental health service time; they have also increased the Parkinson’s service capacity to manage complex mental health symptoms effectively. I recognise the good work that Parkinson’s nurses do. Their support and advice have probably been invaluable to the families who have benefited from them up and down the country. Parkinson’s UK is calling for more nurses; it has said that the nurses should have a workload of no more than 300 cases at any one time, as recommended by NICE. I hope that the Scottish Government can consider those calls and I look forward to a future in which everyone has on-going access to Parkinson’s nurses. Notwithstanding some of the negatives that are associated with the condition, we have all heard this afternoon that it is possible to have a quality of life with Parkinson’s. As Dennis Robertson suggested, that hope should certainly be our objective after the debate.

As members of the Health and Sport Committee, Mr Paterson and I recently heard evidence about family nurse partnerships, particularly their roll-out in NHS Lothian, during our inquiry into teenage pregnancy. Although I believe that we are all supportive of the initiative, I was concerned to hear that recruitment into the partnerships is having an impact on health visitor numbers because health visitors are applying to be family nurses. Does the minister share those concerns and what action will he take to ensure that there is no detrimental effect on overstretched health visitor provision?

I thank Christina McKelvie for bringing this important debate to the chamber. We have heard that, every year, 130 people in Scotland are diagnosed with motor neurone disease. MND is a rapidly progressing terminal neurological disease, and people who are diagnosed with the illness usually become severely disabled. Symptoms include the loss of their ability to walk, speak, feed themselves and breathe unaided. The damage caused by MND is progressive, and people who suffer from the life-limiting disease do not experience periods of improvement. Sadly, average life expectancy following a diagnosis of MND is just 14 months. The motion asks us to acknowledge MND Scotland’s welfare reform campaign and the “Time to benefit people with MND” report. I commend MND Scotland for the work that it has done to highlight the impact that welfare reforms will have on people with MND, as well as all the work that it does to support people who suffer from the illness, particularly through advice and support services. Those services are mentioned in the motion but, unfortunately, I will not have time to come on to them in this short debate. Most members agree on the devastating effects that some of the coalition Government’s welfare reforms are having and will have on our constituents and the areas that we represent. Simplification of the benefits system through the introduction of the universal credit is an example of where the UK Government has probably got the broad approach right. However, its approach goes awry in implementation and in the cutting of support for individuals. The motion that Christina McKelvie has put before the Parliament highlights the bedroom tax, so I will concentrate my remarks on that measure. We know that 79 per cent of households affected by the bedroom tax include a disabled person. Christina McKelvie is quite right to say that, for people who suffer from MND, the second bedroom is not a spare room but somewhere to keep their wheelchair, hoist, breathing equipment and speaking aids. That equipment keeps the person suffering from MND safe at night, but some of it can often be noisy, which means that their partner may need a separate room in which to sleep. Furthermore, the houses are often specially adapted for tenants and owners with disabilities. Therefore, any move may incur more cost, as the new property would also have to be suitably adapted. Local authorities have said that they do not have the housing stock available to meet the demands created by the bedroom tax. For that reason, as well as the injustices faced by individuals and groups of people with particular conditions, the bedroom tax is, at best, a misguided policy solution to a problem that is really about the lack of affordable and appropriate housing. People with MND will be affected not just by the bedroom tax. The “Time to benefit people with MND” report also highlights the impacts that there will be from the changes to employment and support allowance and the introduction of personal independence payments, which are being rolled out this month. It simply must be possible to achieve a fairer way of assessing need that recognises that people with some conditions will, unfortunately, not get better or even experience significant fluctuations in the severity of their conditions that mean that their capacity to work is likely to change drastically. The position that sufferers of MND are in indicates that there are real problems with the system that the coalition Government is putting in place. Indeed, we should recognise that, as Christina McKelvie was right to highlight, the previous system was far from perfect for many of those people. Therefore, the situation represents an opportunity missed. In closing, I return to the issue of the bedroom tax and I repeat something that I have said before—this Parliament as a whole, across the parties, has failed on the issue. I take the view that what Ed Miliband said last week about localising housing support decisions and coupling the issue of support with housing supply is, overall, the correct way to go. Notwithstanding the Scottish Government announcements today, which did not clarify any plans for a separate Scottish welfare system, I accept that those people who support independence genuinely believe that Scotland on its own could create a fairer system. The issue for me is what we do in the meantime—what we do now for people who are affected by MND. On that issue, we as a Parliament have failed to put in place either the money, policies or guidance to protect people from being unfairly penalised by the bedroom tax. I hope that all members who take part in the debate will resolve to come together and work together to deliver real support to the real people who are suffering—not just in 2014, 2015 or 2016, but today, in 2013.

I thank Mr Mason for bringing the debate to the chamber this afternoon. I do not recognise any of the antagonism that he describes in relation to politics in the east end of Glasgow, but I am grateful to him for ensuring that the matter is debated in the Scottish Parliament. It has not escaped members’ notice that the Royal Bank of Scotland is more than 80 per cent owned by the taxpayer. Unfortunately, it does not appear that that fact has led to the bank becoming any more responsive to the real needs of its customers or indeed to those of the people whom Mr Mason and I represent in the east end of Glasgow. The rationale for the closure of the Shettleston branch on 20 June 2013 is that a declining number of customers wish to make use of a physical branch located in their community. Many of us are increasingly using home broadband internet connections, smartphones and other means to access online applications for banking services. However, when my colleague and local Shettleston MP Margaret Curran met RBS representatives—and I know that John Mason, too, will have raised this issue—she quoted the footfall figures that were collected and which demonstrate that people use the branch at the rate of almost one a minute. It hardly sounds as if the service that RBS is offering from the cash counters is moribund; indeed, John Mason has described the queues that he has encountered at the branch. There are good reasons why people rely on the branch, and the options that RBS seems to think will replace the service for local people are not likely to be useful for many people in the east end of the city. I would have thought that a bank would seek to know its customers and their circumstances as well as possible, but perhaps RBS’s lack of understanding on this issue partly explains the troubles in which it has recently found itself. It is well known that in Glasgow digital inclusion is in fact a story of exclusion. Many RBS customers in Shettleston will not be switching to an iPhone or app but they will be quite right if they decide to switch bank. Likewise, at a time when there is so much debate about how we ensure that the many people who do not have access to a bank account can access benefit payments as a result of welfare reform changes, RBS’s decision will make things worse. Richard Lyle was absolutely correct to highlight our recent debate on Citizens Advice Scotland’s report on the subject; indeed, I suggest that the managers at RBS seek advice from CAS on the impact of the changes on communities such as Shettleston so that they understand just how difficult the decision will make the job of ensuring that people have access to bank accounts. I also note the concerns expressed by Sandyhills community council and particularly the credit union, which have thrown the issues into pretty stark relief. Given all the prevailing reasons for encouraging credit unions, I have to say that I find it incredibly worrying when a credit union says that such an unthinking decision will seriously affect its ability to provide services to local people. I commend the community council, the credit union and all of the area’s political representatives both from Mr Mason’s party and my own, and I echo the call for RBS to change its mind. If it will not listen to its customers in Shettleston, perhaps it will try listening to its 70,000 shareholders in the area.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what action it has taken to secure jobs and conditions at the O2 Skypark facility in Glasgow following the announcement by Telefónica that 3,000 jobs are to be outsourced to Capita. (S4T-00383)

I thank the minister for his response and his letter on the same subject, which his office emailed to me in the last hour. I hope that he will seek a meeting with Capita and impress upon it the need to be open with the nearly 900 O2 staff about the company’s post-2015 plans for the Skypark facility. Discussions between Telefónica and Capita, which apparently covered the possible future closure of the Glasgow Skypark facility, should not have been uncovered through a press report. The Communication Workers Union and others who have been seeking reassurances on the behalf of staff have had their relationship with the management of both companies damaged as a result. Does the minister agree that it is unacceptable for Telefónica O2 to walk away from its loyal staff, protesting that conditions will be initially protected while in private being involved in discussions about a rundown? Will he call on Telefónica O2 to delay the transfer of the staff to Capita until Capita can be clear about its own intentions with regard to my many constituents who work for this significant Glasgow employer? After all, it is simply not credible to take a 10-year contract but have a clear plan only for the first two years.

I am grateful to the minister for the assistance that he has indicated that he will provide to the staff and for his good offices in attempting to establish Capita’s plans post 2015. When the jobs came to Glasgow, they were considered to be good-quality jobs. Wages at the facility are significantly higher than those at other Capita call centres. However, over the past few years, O2 benefited from significant public support for the establishment of the Skypark facility. Will the minister ask Scottish Enterprise to examine the clauses for some of the additional support that was provided? Will the minister consider what support will be provided to such organisations in the future in light of not just the decisions that have apparently been taken so far but the further decisions that we expect and, crucially, the manner in which decisions and discussions seem to have been taken forward by Telefónica O2 and Capita?

Will the member give way?

This debate has taken us two hours or so this afternoon, but for the chronic pain sufferers in the public gallery and those in our constituencies and regions who are following our proceedings, the debate about the need for proper support for and treatment of chronic pain has taken more than 11 years. It has been a good, consensual debate. Jackson Carlaw started well when he introduced a note of levity, but he still made serious and sincere points. Margo MacDonald—who, if I picked it up correctly, made a sedentary intervention that could probably win an award for heckle of the year—and Nanette Milne told us that such conditions are absolutely not a laughing matter, but we were still able to progress through the debate in a generous way. We should remember that, for every hour and day of those 11 years, Scots have suffered in pain while politicians have failed to put in place all the services for which they have asked us. Despite that, members on all sides have approached the debate in a spirit of hope rather than recrimination. I listened to the radio on my way to the Parliament this morning, and it was clear that many people feel that they have been let down by the seemingly endless debate and investigation of the issue rather than action. Reports and recommendations have come and gone and the sun has set after a number of false dawns. Throughout that time, there have also been the voices of those who have been helped by the services that exist, such as those who have benefited from a visit to Bath and those whose health boards provide more support than others. Members throughout the chamber sought to give voice to those people. Perhaps most memorably, we heard Stewart Stevenson’s description of his hypnotic trip. I noticed that the minister paid close attention to that, so I will let him deal with some of the points that Mr Stevenson raised. I think that it was Bob Doris who said that we all have examples of constituents who have been to see us and of partners or family members who have contacted us because a loved one is unable to make that contact themselves. People are often unable to live the life that they would choose to live because they are lying in pain at home. In 2011, Scottish Labour included in our manifesto for the elections to this Parliament our commitment to a residential treatment centre for chronic pain. We therefore welcome the cabinet secretary’s confirmation this afternoon that that will be adopted by the Scottish Government. We accept that it is sensible to examine the options and consult those who are most likely to benefit from such a service about the best model of delivery for a centre. A residential centre is a vital component of what I think John Wilson described as a comprehensive service for chronic pain sufferers because of the respite that it could offer as well as the treatment that it could provide. We know that those who have travelled elsewhere in the UK have benefited significantly from their experience despite the distances involved, which in one case amounted to a return journey of 1,600 miles from Shetland, as Jackie Baillie mentioned. Up to now, only a very small number of people have been able to do that—the figure is 119 patients. The provision of in-patient facilities closer to home is likely to increase substantially the number of people who will wish to have access to them. Graeme Pearson was right to highlight the cost of sending patients to Bath, which has amounted to just over £1 million in the past few years. It would be useful to lose much of the travel element of that expenditure, and we can do that if we have a service that suits the needs of pain sufferers across Scotland. An in-patient resource would be an important step and an important statement in not just recognising chronic pain but resolving to help those who are affected. However, the pressures of the likely demand as well as the need to consider the best interests of patients mean that it can only ever be one component of the comprehensive package of support that must be provided. Chronic pain is associated with long-term conditions, and long-term support that is proportionate to needs—and particularly to varying needs—is essential. When people are able to continue in work, services must be responsive to their lives rather than force them to give up or become isolated as a result of the pain that they suffer. Jim Hume was right to say that, like other long-term conditions, chronic pain can reduce people’s resilience as well as inhibit their daily lives. Hanzala Malik, for Scottish Labour, argued that the most urgent reform that is required, beyond the provision of in-patient services for those who are most in need, is for the Scottish ministers to act to end the postcode lottery of care. Services in different parts of the country should be responsive to local needs and opportunities. As a Glasgow MSP, I particularly recognise the innovation that has been possible in my health board area because of the championing of a managed clinical network by the Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS board. However, when chronic pain conditions are so widespread and so debilitating to so many people in every part of Scotland, it cannot be right that a wide divergence exists not only in what support is provided but—too often—in relation to whether any real support is offered at all. Another related issue that Labour members have sought to highlight, and which is topical across nearly all NHS services at the moment, is the time that people are waiting to access the support that is available. Despite the good practice that exists in Glasgow, for example, last year my constituents who were waiting for an appointment with a pain psychologist could face waits of about 18 months—waiting times that many of us thought had been abolished since this Parliament was created and took control of our national health service. At the end of last year, those waiting times were down, but they were still more than a year. We therefore believe that, following agreement and, I hope, some consensus about what pain sufferers across the country have a right to expect, the Scottish Government will also need to make some firm commitments about what should be considered reasonable waiting periods for people for whom every hour or day of living with pain can be a mental as well as a physical trial. The current co-conveners of the cross-party group on chronic pain have been mentioned, as have a number of activists including Dorothy-Grace Elder, who championed the issue as a member of Parliament and has kept up the pressure outside Parliament as a journalist and campaigner, and Susan Archibald, who petitioned the Parliament on the issue and whose willingness to share her story has ensured that attention to her case might benefit others. Those individuals and many others have kept up the pressure on an issue that was never going to go away, despite a lack of action from this place for too long. Those outside the Parliament who have persisted in their campaigning know that today is not the end of their wait; the actions that we have discussed and that will now be consulted on are not—as I think Siobhan McMahon said—the last words on the matter. It is a cliché to say that actions speak louder than words, but it is true that budgets demonstrate commitment much more effectively than platitudes. Providing the required services will be good value for money, but they will need to be resourced. The clinical network in Glasgow, which has been mentioned a few times, was started with only modest initial funding, but 10 out of 14 health boards still have no budget at all for chronic pain treatment. It is therefore no surprise that the Scottish service model for chronic pain is being followed consistently by only six boards. A number of members have mentioned the various reports that have been produced. The Healthcare Improvement Scotland report of last year was perhaps the document that caused the most consternation among people who follow the issue of chronic pain because it was perceived to underplay real experience in favour of painting the picture in the best possible light. Such practices from official inspection bodies are not helpful, but on the Labour side of the chamber we are pleased that the current cabinet secretary has decided to look beyond the official picture and attempt to see what support is needed to make a real difference to people’s lives. Joan McAlpine raised the cost of prescriptions, and there is a debate to be had about that. It was not necessarily appropriate to raise that issue in this debate, but perhaps when the minister closes he might say a word or two about some of the value-for-money issues. We want people who need painkillers to get them, but painkillers cost 19p from high street pharmacists while it costs the Scottish health service £3.10 to provide them through the current arrangements. There are questions to be asked about that. Scottish Labour has reiterated its commitment to chronic pain sufferers. The amendment in the name of Jackie Baillie seeks not to criticise or to trip up ministers but simply to add a degree of urgency around the long-understood and long-awaited need for in-patient provision. Sandra White even appeared to have a venue in mind for that. I hope that members will support that urgency and the need to have consistent services across the country.

Following last week’s vote in the House of Commons, Stonewall Scotland called on us members of the Scottish Parliament to “get on with it” in relation to equal marriage in Scotland, so I very much welcome the cabinet secretary’s confirmation that a bill will be introduced before the summer recess. While the progress of that bill will be a matter for the Parliament and the Presiding Officers, could the cabinet secretary indicate whether, under the timetable that he has in mind, he envisages that the first marriages that take place under the bill’s provisions will do so before or after the September 2014 referendum?

5. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to tackle bullying in the national health service. (S4F-01388)

The First Minister frequently praises and thanks hard-working staff for their dedication, and he is right to do so, but according to the Royal College of Nursing less than a third of nurses believe that, if they reported their concerns, they would be believed. Any suggestion of a culture of management bullying—whether in specific workplaces or more widely—is completely unacceptable, particularly when it would threaten robust whistleblowing procedures, which we know to be absolutely necessary. Therefore, in the light of reports that one in four NHS staff have been subjected to bullying and that, in the Scottish Ambulance Service, more than a third of staff say that they have been a victim of bullying, will the First Minister undertake to ensure that the new national whistleblowing helpline that he mentioned is publicised more widely? For example, will he agree that the helpline’s telephone number should be printed on all NHS payslips?

I am grateful to be called to speak in the debate, and I thank Christina McKelvie for enabling us to have it. I also thank Citizens Advice Scotland for the “Voices from the Frontline” reports that it has produced over the past year and a half or so. They have been extremely useful and, no doubt, they will continue to be so. I live in the G20 postcode area in Glasgow, which is probably one of the postcode areas in the city with the widest disparities, as it extends north from Great Western Road up to Maryhill Road and then further north. In thinking about online services, I am always conscious of the number of constituents who contact me to complain about the lack of such services. For example, I commonly receive complaints that various services that Glasgow City Council offers are not available online. Some people, particularly at the southern end of that postcode area, will be extremely outraged by that. There is hidden discrimination, and it has many elements. Christina McKelvie is absolutely right that we have a discriminatory situation around digital inclusion. People might be discriminated against because, for age reasons, they have no experience of using some of the technology. For others, their disability might mean that using technology does not come easily. The issue might be a lack of infrastructure in their area—whether because of rurality or something else—or their economic means and inability to afford the regular direct debit to a broadband provider that most of us have, which we either forget about or pay little attention to. However, such discrimination is real for people who live in the G20 postcode, for example, who will be completely cut out of the move by public services to online delivery. Malcolm Chisholm and Dennis Robertson are right to say that we all support that move if it saves money and is easier for people. There are a range of reasons why we do not want to produce more and more paper for benefit applications. The problem is when the process becomes digital by default rather than digital by design. If the DWP is going to make such a change, it is really not helpful for it to suggest a target of having 80 per cent of benefit applications made online when it is completely impractical for that to happen. There is almost an irony in the Government driving forward information technology advances when we know how poor the Government itself is at IT. There is a punishment for misclaiming. If someone makes an error in the process, which might be because they are not used to using digital provision or because it is not available for them, the system will punish them. To be frank, that is ridiculous. There is an issue with how we support people. Of course we want libraries to assist people to make applications online, but we cannot put librarians in the position of being amateur welfare rights officers, aware that any errors might lead to money being claimed back from the person who is trying to apply for the benefit. I agree with most members on the Government benches on the matter—obviously, I disagree on the constitutional point and I will not get into that. When such situations happen, we have a responsibility always to think about what we can do about them. We can do much more on training, skills and supporting people to be digital. We should be conscious of some of the money that has been lost from that and of the fact that many computer skills are now described simply as hobby skills. St Charles’ primary school in the G20 postcode is round the corner from where I live. I do not know whether it has been able to achieve this yet, but I discussed with the headteacher there some of the issues and how they affect the kids. She said that if some of the parents could come in at half past 3—or whenever they pick up their kids—they could use the school’s computers. She would be really keen to try that. That was an example of someone not just saying, “Something bad is happening. It’s not my responsibility to do anything about it,” but thinking about the practical steps that she could take to intervene. It is not practical to suggest that schools should open themselves up to all people who are in need of a computer to make a benefit application, but that is a small example of the practical steps that we could all think about taking. The Scottish Government needs to think about that too, and I look forward to the minister indicating what steps she is taking.

I welcome the measures that the cabinet secretary has outlined, but can he offer an assurance about what is happening for those patients who are awaiting secondary treatment? Although all the Government’s efforts on early detection and initial treatment are extremely important and welcome, they will not be enough if people then face further waiting periods for follow-up treatment such as radiotherapy.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will Mark McDonald take an intervention?

This has been an interesting debate. Despite the pressures that face the NHS in Scotland, we have managed to come together and make it clear that we remain proud of our service, particularly of all our hard-working NHS staff, who are at the front line of delivering a service that is responsive to the needs of patients and which prioritises quality as well as efficiency. When the Unison national health conference met in Glasgow two weeks ago, I was delighted to attend and to welcome delegates to my city and to Scotland. The discussions that I had with visitors and local Unison activists reflected that in Scotland, under successive Scottish Governments, we have chosen a different path for our NHS. Alongside consensus, there is a need for honesty. Delegates who work in Scotland’s hospitals were not quiet about the challenges that they face in the service for which we are all responsible. At a national level, the Auditor General for Scotland has described the service as being “on amber warning”; at a local level, front-line NHS staff have described the reality of working on a ward with too few nurses. When the standard of care suffers, no one is more frustrated by it than the hospital staff. Health board managers also know that the financial and staffing pressures are having an impact on the ground. Each of us will no doubt be contacted regularly by constituents regarding the service that they are getting. Labour has therefore sought to confront the politics of this place with the real-life picture of what is happening in our hospital wards. We should be honest about the funding and staffing pressures that the service is facing, as well as the demographic challenge. The cabinet secretary has spoken about the latter before, and so have we. Health and social care integration is partly a response to our shared view that the current set-up will not work into the future. A number of members have pointed out that bed numbers should not be our only guide. The NHS exists to help people get better if they are sick and to help those with longer-term conditions—and all of us—as we get older to live our lives as fully as we can. None of us would want to see anyone in a hospital if their admission could be prevented, or to see people lying in a hospital bed for any longer than they need to. That point has been made consistently by this party, both in opposition and when we were in government. There is a contrast there with the words of Nicola Sturgeon, which have already been quoted this afternoon. When she was in opposition, she said that cutting bed numbers had been going on for “far too long”. In The Scotsman on 8 July 2006, she said: “We should ... increase the number of acute staffed beds to the benefit of the patients of Scotland.” The reality, six and a half years later is this: in 2007, the average number of available staffed beds was 17,505—members should remember that that was after bed cuts had, according to the SNP, been going on for “far too long”—and, in December 2012, the average number of available staffed beds was 16,085. Although Nicola Sturgeon said that “We should ... increase the number of acute staffed beds to the benefit of the patients of Scotland”, what she did was reduce the number of available beds by 1,420. At the Unison health conference, Alex Neil decided to revisit the issue of bed numbers. Perhaps he wanted to clarify the Scottish Government’s position. Perhaps he thought that it was time for an update. For the benefit of Fiona McLeod, Bob Doris and others, it was not Jackie Baillie who said this; it was the cabinet secretary who said: “we are still going to need the same number of beds, the same number of hospitals, the same number of doctors and nurses just to stand still”. That is the direct quote that the Scottish Government has argued should be deleted from today’s motion and replaced with a reference to minimum pricing. Minimum honesty might have been a better bet from the Scottish Government this afternoon. Standing still is also a term that might require further definition. Since 2009, the Scottish Government has cut almost 2,000 nursing and midwifery staff, and student nurse numbers have also been slashed. The number of nursing and midwifery staff is now lower than when the SNP came to power. Far from standing still, an awful lot of nurses seem to have managed to find their way out the door. On bed numbers and staffing, therefore, we seem to have a problem with what is said in public about our hospitals, and what is actually happening in our hospitals. On hospitals, Sarah Boyack was absolutely right to point out that, at the same time as the cabinet secretary was making his comments to Unison about bed numbers and staffing, he also asserted that changing demographics—more older people—means maintaining “the same number of hospitals”. Again, that is a clear commitment from the Scottish Government. I am sure that, given the cabinet secretary’s interest in hospital campaigns, it was a guarantee that he was pleased to give. It therefore remains rather unfortunate that, as the same time as Mr Neil was talking to Unison in Glasgow, here in Edinburgh NHS Lothian was confirming that it was looking at closing not one or two but three hospitals. Asked about that apparent inconsistency, a spokesperson for the Scottish Government said “We are committed to at least maintaining the level of quality and provision in Scotland’s NHS – and that means having the right numbers of staff and beds”. In 2006, the SNP claimed that NHS Scotland needed to increase bed numbers; by 2012, it had actually cut them. Two weeks ago, Alex Neil was promising Unison activists that the numbers would be kept the same; by the day after that, the SNP wanted to talk about finding the “right numbers”. Today, the SNP is asking Parliament to delete all references to numbers and it is also saying that we should have talked about minimum pricing—except that we did not, so we will have to come back to that one another day. Since the cabinet secretary came to his role, we have had a scandal over the SNP’s hidden waiting lists and attempts to change the four-hour accident and emergency waiting time target, which is the same target that has not been met across Scotland for the past three years. As Jackie Baillie said, Scottish Labour is happy to debate all those issues, and minimum pricing, with the Scottish Government any day of the week. It would however make for a more honest debate if comments that are made outside of the chamber in one week were a bit closer to the comments that are made in chamber a few weeks later. When the cabinet secretary was speaking to Unison, he was addressing workers who cope on the front line day and daily. When our constituents come to our surgeries or telephone our offices, they tell us of a service that is under pressure. When the Auditor General says that the NHS is on an “amber warning” and when ministers’ comments fail to reflect the situation on the ground, it is the Parliament’s duty to pause and think about whether we want to have a debate in which the rhetoric reflects reality rather than obscuring it. The cabinet secretary simply asserts that beds, staff and hospitals all need to stay the same, at the same time as NHS Lothian confirms that it wants to close three hospitals. NHS Lothian’s most recent board paper says that the overall number of doctors will decrease. NHS Western Isles is currently proposing a cut from 89 beds to just 53, and my own health board, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, is conducting an acute services review. None of that squares with the cabinet secretary’s comments to Unison but it does square with the Government’s amendment today. If the civil servants got to Alex Neil after his comments today, they also got to all his backbenchers, not one of whom was prepared to defend his comments of last week. On the number of hospitals, the number of beds in those hospitals, and the number of staff around those beds, the Scottish Government would do well to remember the purpose of those beds: to provide a warm and safe place for the treatment of someone who is in need. Let us give those people the respect that they deserve by taking their experiences seriously and being honest about how we respond to the challenges that we all know caring for them presents. I urge the Parliament to support the motion in Jackie Baillie’s name and to reject Mr Neil’s amendment, even though it served the purpose of clarifying that, when he told Unison that all nurses, doctors, beds and hospitals would stay the same, he did not really mean it.

I congratulate Neil Findlay not only on securing the debate but on the campaigning that he has done on the issue. Presiding Officer, I draw your and other members’ attention to my entry in the register of interests. Like other members, I thank the Scottish Affairs Committee for its work. In particular, I thank the chairman, Ian Davidson, and Pamela Nash, who both came here recently to provide us with a very useful and, as Anne McTaggart was right to say, shocking briefing, which was co-ordinated by Neil Findlay and included representatives of people who have been affected—UCATT, Unite and the GMB. Blacklisting has cost men and women their livelihoods. It has destroyed lives. The companies that are responsible are forever tainted by their involvement, and they must be held accountable. This time last week, we marked international workers memorial day in the chamber. Many members made the connection between the fight for decent health and safety regulation in this country and the utterly unnecessary sacrifice of human life for greed and profit that occurred in Bangladesh. Here, health and safety is under attack as never before. Vital regulation is being ripped up, and workers are being put at risk by cuts to inspections and a failure to enforce or prosecute. The Tory Government seems to be picking up where it left off in 1997. The focus has moved—rather, it has been widened—from trying to break workplace organisation and the labour movement through assaults on collective rights to a new assault on individual employment rights. Workers are being encouraged to swap rights for shares, and the employment tribunal system, which is a last resort, is being closed off, too. A worker who has been unfairly dismissed now has to pay to have their complaint heard. It is claimed that blacklisting is a historical practice. What has been uncovered is indeed a conspiracy that has gone on for decades, but members should be in no doubt regarding allegations that have been made about blacklisting during recent construction projects, including for the Olympic games and London crossrail. The same firms are currently benefiting from Scottish public sector contracts, and they are employing my constituents to work for them today. By its very nature, blacklisting is a clandestine activity, and its victims are unlikely to know that they are victims. The most recent concerns raised by Unite relate to crossrail contracts, or rather the loss of a contract when it was alleged that 28 workers had been made redundant because of an attempt by union members to raise health and safety concerns. That allegation relates to circumstances in September 2012. I ask members to imagine what it would be like to be a construction worker who raises concerns about corners being cut on a site or about the safety of a scaffold or a piece of equipment. What is their motivation to speak out? Now, I ask each member to think about the motivation of the employer, who notes down their name and shares their file to ensure that they never work again. The worker concerned might not know that he is on that list. He might suspect, and he might tell others about it, but he will probably be dismissed as a conspiracy theorist. Perhaps his partner blames him for not being able to find work or keep a job. His kids wonder why their friends’ dads are in work, whereas he is unable to provide for them. Blacklisting victims are a victim of an imbalance in the workplace between the employer and the employee. There are good employers and bad employers, but that imbalance exists everywhere. Collective organisation by the weaker party—by working people, both at work and politically—remains the only way to ensure a tilt towards a world of work for our children that is better than the one that we inherited from our parents and grandparents. People who organise in trade unions, people who speak out because something is unsafe and people who agitate for the fair remuneration of their labour should not be blacklisted—they should be celebrated. Let this Parliament celebrate them by getting on and doing something for them. If the UK Government will not have a public inquiry, let us set one up. Let us demand compensation for victims. Let us examine the contractors who are delivering our public works now. Let us use procurement to ensure that the corporations responsible are hurt in the only place that they will notice it—on their balance sheets.

Does that not underline the fact that we need a public inquiry to raise that evidence, and that the agencies in Scotland that award the contracts are the people who are best placed to tell us what is going on in those contracts? We could do that all in public and we could involve a range of agencies in Scotland, including the police, as there have been questions about where some of the information that was passed to the Consulting Association came from.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to prevent the backfilling of civilian staff posts by police officers. (S4O-02061)

In the cabinet secretary’s answer to Kezia Dugdale, he mentioned the 1,000 extra police officers, but he will be aware of the 977 fewer police staff in the past two years. George McIrvine, Unison branch secretary, said: “We have been told for two years by the employers and the Scottish Government that they are not backfilling posts, but they are. There is backfilling in control rooms, in custody and in project work ... the veneer of effective policing is cracking.” Just a few weeks ago, Unison members told members of this Parliament, including SNP back benchers, the same thing in a committee room of this Parliament. Were those Unison members confused about what is going on in police control rooms or were they fibbing?

I draw members’ attention to my entry in the register of members’ interests. I thank the Presiding Officer for her latitude in calling me to speak in the debate, as I must apologise to members because I will need to leave before the end of the debate for a meeting with representatives of the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians. Speaking in this place is always a privilege, but on occasions such as this it is also an honour. I thank my colleague John Pentland for lodging the motion for debate and for ensuring that members of the Scottish Parliament have the opportunity to honour the workers throughout this country and around the world who have had their lives taken from them over the course of the past year and in the further past. I add my voice in support of all the families who have witnessed their loved ones leave for work in the morning, but have looked in vain to welcome them home again. On the occasion of international workers memorial day, we also acknowledge all the workers who have been injured at work or who have been left with debilitating or limiting conditions. As many members will, I will mark the day by laying a wreath at my local event at the People’s Palace in Glasgow. I encourage all members to look out for the events that will take place in their areas this weekend. Workers memorial day is a campaigning opportunity as well as a time of solemn remembrance, but physical memorials are important. In the next couple of weeks, Glasgow will mark the unveiling of the firefighters heritage trail, which will include 12 memorial stones placed to mark sites such as the Cheapside Street fire, in which 19 firefighters were lost in 1960, and the fire at James Watt Street, also in Anderston, in which 22 workers—most of them women—were lost when an upholstery warehouse caught fire in 1968. As someone who lives close to the memorial stones that stand in remembrance of the 2004 explosion at ICL Plastics in Maryhill, I am reminded of that tragedy—in which nine workers were killed—almost every day. As I mentioned, workers memorial day, which falls just before the workers gala day or May day, is a chance to remember, but it is also a focal point for campaigning and activism. I pay tribute to everyone in Scotland and around the world who is involved in the struggle to ensure that in every workplace the world over, the imbalance that exists between the employers and the employed is tilted back a tiny bit—if not in favour of working people, at least slightly less against them. Every year in the UK, hundreds of people die at work—the figures vary depending on whether we take into account accidents, injuries and conditions resulting from work. John Pentland was quite right to highlight the scandal of blacklisting—many of those who are blacklisted are workers who have raised health and safety concerns. However, the coalition Government is currently rolling back not just years, but centuries of progress on workers’ rights and health and safety enforcement. It is disappointing that no member of the Westminster coalition parties has remained for the debate. At a recent hearing on health and safety that was held by the Health and Sport Committee, of which I am a member, we heard that the rates of death and injury at work remain higher in Scotland than they are in other parts of the United Kingdom, as John Pentland correctly identified. Regarding which powers this Parliament could assume to assist that situation—if that was considered to be the way to drive down those rates—I believe that we should look at enforcement powers and avoid any situation in which we might create a race to the bottom on regulation. Finally, I encourage members to speak to the representatives of the Scottish hazards campaign group and families against corporate killing, who are in Parliament today. Ask them about 16-year-old Cameron who, weeks into his first job, was killed in an accident involving an industrial lathe; or about 17-year-old Steven, who was killed after a fall of 30 feet while at work in a water treatment plant; or about 18-year-old Lewis, who was killed after being burnt in a garage fire. I add my voice to the call to “Remember the dead; fight for the living.”

Will Willie Rennie give way?

Does Mr Rennie not understand that the UK Government’s welfare reforms will actually cost more money, particularly the bedroom tax, although that is just one example? If the UK Government is going to evict people from their homes, where does he think they will be rehoused? Who will pick up the tab for those evictions and for finding new homes for those individuals? His savings are not savings at all.

The Welfare Reform Committee was established following Parliament’s agreement to reject a motion that would have given legislative consent to the UK Government on aspects of welfare reform, and today’s debate has again underlined that we were right to push for that approach. We on the Labour side of the chamber have said that we recognise that the welfare system was in need of further change. We supported, for example, the principle of universal credit to ensure that we have a fairer and simpler welfare state—secured by enhanced public support for assistance—that provides for us all in times and circumstances of need, and we made changes when we were in Government. However, our view remains that, in addition to reforming the welfare system itself, our primary aim should be to ensure that, for those of us who are able to work, there is decent work for us to do. The exposition that we have heard on the impact of the changes that the Tory-led Government is making reinforces our view that the UK Government has failed to get that balance correct. It has, in fact, made a number of changes that are unfair and unlikely to work in and of themselves. Such is the bedroom tax, which Mark MacDonald quite rightly highlighted. They collectively represent real and significant reductions in the incomes of many people, including many of the working poor. They are also a serious threat to local economies in many of the most deprived areas of the country. In short, the report justifies the stance that we have taken alongside the Scottish Government to reject the UK Government’s approach and, where possible, to seek to minimise the impact that negative changes will have on the people whom we represent, and to use the substantial powers of the Scottish Parliament to assist those who are most in need.

That last—powers—is an area of disagreement between Labour and the SNP. We have heard about some of that today, but it has also been good to hear the arguments of the Tories and the Lib Dems. It has been a bit of a change for those of us who are used to the debate to hear such boisterous support, other than from Mr Johnstone, who is always with us. It is good to see the Lib Dems taking part and defending their policy. That has not been the case in every one of these debates. As a Glasgow MSP, I thank the convener and many other members for highlighting Glasgow’s circumstances. According to the report, it will see a loss of £270 million in spending power as a result of the welfare reforms. Bob Doris was right to say that, in absolute terms, that figure is second only to what Birmingham will lose. The figure of a £1.6 billion loss to Scotland, which the committee has obtained, is larger than some of the figures that we have been working from, such as that in the Scottish local government forum against poverty report. It is lower than Citizens Advice Scotland believed it might be, and is substantially lower than the figure that the Scottish Government publicised. It is useful to have independent figures in the public domain, so the report is a significant staging post on the journey towards understanding the likely consequences of and, therefore, what our priorities should be for mitigation of Tory policy and the better prioritisation of spending that is being made by the current Scottish Government. Jackie Baillie was right to highlight the information that was published in The Herald today on that subject. We have heard that Scotland is in the middle of the table in terms of the potential impact of the reforms. We are not as badly affected as the north of England, Wales or London, but we are worse off than southern England, excluding London. We sit between the west midlands, which are above us, and the east midlands, which is suffering less of an impact. Alex Johnstone was right on one point when he said that the impact in Scotland is also differentiated. The number of people who will be affected in the north-east, excluding Dundee, is much smaller than the number in places such as Glasgow, Renfrewshire, Inverclyde, Lanarkshire, and West Dunbartonshire. In other words, the impact will be hardest in areas that are already the most deprived and where services are already the most stretched. When it comes to local authorities putting money in to support council tax benefits, these are the areas in which least money is available. The impact will be felt more by the people for whom life is already more difficult than that of their neighbours. Mike Holmes of Enable Scotland gave evidence to the committee and highlighted that point when he talked about a “perfect storm”. The point was also highlighted by the SCVO’s briefing for today’s debate, although it has not been picked up on. Mike Holmes talked about “changes to services, tightening eligibility criteria, fewer college places and a much harder jobs market”—[Official Report, Welfare Reform Committee, 24 April 2012; c 138.] and the already “shockingly low” levels of employment that exist among disabled people. The changes to uprating, to incapacity benefit and to working tax credit add up to the biggest overall losses in the benefits system across Scotland. The situation on tax credits is particularly disappointing, especially given the role that tax credits played in part of our success in substantially reducing levels of poverty when we were in Government. Finally, I want to touch on the bedroom tax. In its briefing for the debate, Barnardo’s called on us to move our debate beyond the bedroom tax, but it has been highlighted by a number of members this afternoon, and it was most clearly set out by Iain Gray. There is disagreement between Labour and the SNP about how we should respond to the bedroom tax. It is important because significant numbers of people are being affected by it, and because it is an example of a change that is unfair and can readily be understood to be unfair. It therefore presents us with an opportunity to convince the large numbers of people who support punitive welfare changes that the Tory approach is not the right one.

Thank you, Presiding Officer.

Will the member give way?

I have been making representations on the issue to Glasgow City Council since I was contacted by a constituent, and I welcome the minister’s comments about establishing a commission to consider the legislative situation. I agree that each local authority needs to examine its practices and be clear that the information has been provided to individuals who have concerns. Does the minister share my view that part of people’s concern relates to the fact that different practices have been followed in different parts of the country and that, for that reason, national co-ordination is needed regarding the investigation of complaints as well as regarding the consideration of any legislative proposals?

Will the member give way?

I am grateful to the member for giving way. He is right, and it is interesting to have that debate about the level of taxation. I recall that, when he was on a panel talking about poverty in Glasgow not long ago, he said that he would prefer taxation to rise. How does that square with the cabinet secretary’s position, which I understand is that, in an independent Scotland, corporation tax would fall and personal taxation would not rise?

If the council tax is a regressive form of taxation, how can freezing a regressive form of taxation be progressive? Can Jamie Hepburn explain that to me?

Like other members, I have been contacted by many constituents in Glasgow about the specific instance at the weekend. I have also been contacted in the past following demonstrations by anti-fascist and anti-austerity campaigners in Glasgow, and I am being contacted more often by football supporters. In what circumstances does the cabinet secretary believe that the police should use the practice of kettling, which I believe we refer to in Scotland as containment? What are the implications for members of the public who may not have previously been caught up in such demonstrations and their trust in the police? Obviously, kettling is extremely distressing for people who are caught up in it.

If a week is a long time in politics, 10 years ago can sometimes feel like yesterday. Across the chamber, we will all be acutely aware of the division that the decision to invade Iraq caused, and none of us will have difficulty recalling our emotions and our opinions on what happened. That has been brought into sharp focus by this morning’s events in Iraq. The motion talks about the tribute that we should pay to all those who lost their lives in the conflict, and members on all sides of the chamber do that. The number of dead and wounded have been added to today and since the end of UK combat operations. Our thoughts should be with the families of those individuals. The real lives and deaths of people like us should be what we remember today, not justifications, recriminations or the politics, particularly of the Scottish Parliament. Like others, I have some doubts about the motivation behind the debate, to which I will return towards the end of my speech. I did not support the war in Iraq, but I do not believe that we should be trading our positions on the events of a decade ago or those of 25 years ago in Halabja. Here and now, we have responsibilities and opportunities.

I think that Bruce Crawford put this well when he said that we cannot rewrite history. I said that I wanted to talk about the opportunities and responsibilities that we have now and I think that Mark Griffin was right to talk about the actions that we can take to support the people of Iraq. In this debate, that sentiment is the right one. I would add that we also need to take the opportunity that we have been given in the debate to think about how we support the veterans of the invasion of Iraq: those who went from our country, not of their own will but at the command of others. Many of them paid a heavy price and they, like us, will have a plurality of views on their experience and their contribution. Men and women from every part of Scotland—many from my own city of Glasgow—served in Iraq and are now back among us. The first Gulf war raised awareness of veterans’ issues because of the lack of support provided to those who returned. Despite the divisions that ran—and run—deep across Britain on the issue, we are able to unite on the respect and admiration that are due to ex-servicemen and women. According to Poppyscotland, a number of challenges face veterans, which I think we in the chamber can and should focus on. I was surprised by the points that I am about to make when I first learned of them. I highlight them not in any way to make a point about the Scottish Government, because I recognise that work is continuing on the issue, and I hope that the designation of a minister with responsibility for veterans brings focus to it—I am sure that it does. However, compared with veterans in England and Wales, veterans living in Scotland are 10 per cent more likely to be homeless, 8 per cent more likely to suffer from mental health problems, 5 per cent more likely to have financial problems, 5 per cent more likely to be in prison and 3 per cent more likely to suffer from alcohol problems. None of those things can be about a border, and I do not believe that they can be about a difference in the level of care that Scots have or that the Scottish Government provides. However, those figures demonstrate that, whether because of the places and circumstances that we recruit from in the first place or for other reasons, the challenge that we face in Scotland is greater.

I have said that I was against the war. I genuinely do not feel any need to justify my position on the war in Iraq to the member or to anyone else in the chamber. The motion before us refers to learning the lessons of Iraq, and I am trying to demonstrate something that we could take from it and learn and that we have responsibility over. We know that, before the invasion of Iraq, we failed to plan properly for reconstruction. Many things there have improved, not least because of the removal of Saddam, but it remains the case that people there continue to suffer because what would happen afterwards was not a big enough part of the consideration when the debate raged here and around the world about what would happen next. What happens afterwards for military personnel is something that we need to mainstream, not just in the run-up to or aftermath of conflict. Support services for individuals may be required for significant periods of time and we must maintain capacity to provide help when it is needed. Smaller measures—gestures of respect—are also important. In Glasgow recently, for example, there was a debate in the city chambers on a proposal, which I think was made by an SNP member, that veterans should have concessionary access to public transport as of right. That is a really small effort but, if it was implemented, it might assist with employability for some of them. More than that, for all of them it is just a tiny token of gratitude for service given. On all the issues facing veterans in Scotland today, whether they served in western Europe, Korea, Afghanistan or Basra in Iraq, as my cousin did, I hope that we will use the 10th anniversary of division over conflict to resolve unity on what we can do for those among us who deserve, and should expect, our support. I said earlier that I did not have any illusions about why we are having this debate in this place today, and I think that the politics of today are being played out here as much as those of a previous time. However, in the few moments that I have left for my speech I want to return to the Scottish Government motion before us. I whole-heartedly agree that we should record our tributes to those who paid the costs of Iraq, whether they are our own countrymen or the people of Iraq. I wanted to speak today in order that my name be recorded in the Official Report of this debate and to raise concerns about those who live around us in Scotland who continue to be affected. However, a difficultly is posed for me by the motion’s final clause, which seems to suggest dismissively that those with whom I disagreed about the need for military action were somehow “reckless”—or feckless—in their actions or their motivations. What I know and remember is that military action in Iraq divided us before it began, it divided us when it was happening and it continues to divide us today. That division beset families, parties, countries and Parliaments. I have to say that retrospective moral certainty or attempts to exploit that argument for whatever purpose are ill judged, if not a folly in themselves.

I absolutely welcome the remarks that the minister has repeated today. The issue of concessionary travel is specifically to do with the subway in Glasgow. It would be good if the minister could engage with Strathclyde partnership for transport on how we could take that issue forward. It has been taken forward in partnership with the parties in Glasgow.

Thank you for your forbearance, Presiding Officer. I had not intended to speak in the debate, as I knew that Neil Findlay and others would do the subject justice but, having sat through it, I felt that I could not leave without adding my name into the Official Report of the meeting. Like Siobhan McMahon, I do not remember the 1984 and 1985 strike well although, being a bit older than her, I was around then. I was born into a prosperous town in the West Lothian coalfield. Perhaps “prosperous” is overstating the situation in Whitburn, but we had the Polkemmet colliery and Levi’s, and British Leyland was along the road. I was a toddler at the time of the 1984-85 strike, and I often think about the changes that were going on in the world then and what a trial it was for parents bringing up children in those communities. They knew that the world that they had enjoyed was slowly disappearing and that the life chances of my generation and those who came after me were about to change so much. Those communities are still changed. Many members of my family were miners, although I will not list them all. As I am speaking without notes, I hope that I can do justice to their experience in the pits and their contribution. As I grew up in that community, it became a very different place from the one that I had been born into. I remember many uncles, family friends and others whom I knew around the town who never worked again. One of my proudest moments in the Parliament was taking part in a debate on the upper Clyde shipbuilders. That was one of the first debates that I took part in and I was glad that my grandfather, who was a miner, was able to see me elected to the Parliament and to speak to me about that debate. In the debate, we celebrated the success of men and women taking part in industrial disputes to save their industry and transform their communities and their families’ life chances. That is what happened on the Clyde. We are proud that, as a result of the stance that they took, we are still building ships on the Clyde. O that the miners had been able to achieve the same thing. However, the dignity of the miners’ fight is no less for its having been unsuccessful. I see that the minister has been taking notes throughout the debate and I know that she is perfectly capable of throwing away the cabinet secretary’s previous speeches and remarks on the subject. Given that we are creating a new police force, police Scotland, she might take the opportunity to acknowledge that this is absolutely the time to examine whether there is a case to answer, particularly in relation to Lothian and Borders Police, and to ensure that the new police force genuinely polices communities by consent, in the knowledge that the charges of the past have been answered. The miners’ strike of 1984-85 was a UK dispute—uncles of mine in south Wales were involved, and the issues there will be similar. Given the collusion that went on in relation to the strategies of police forces around the UK, I have no doubt that there was an element of co-ordination from the centre. I do not believe that there could not have been such co-ordination. The issue is probably the biggest remaining sore in industrial relations in Scotland. It is unique in that sense, but we need to ensure that what happened can never happen again. That is why it is right that we have an inquiry at the outset of police Scotland’s operation. We need to reflect on which side of history we are on. The right thing to do is to ensure that the dispute is thoroughly examined and that people are held to account. I hope that the Scottish Government can do that for us, and I hope that my party will commit to doing that in government if the Scottish Government does not step up to the plate in the current parliamentary session. An inquiry and its results should come while there are still mineworkers and their widows who should know the truth and receive compensation.

The minister says that the Deputy First Minister outlined that in response to the JRF report. However, she will be aware that the JRF report said that poor children in Scotland cannot afford to wait for independence and that the Scottish Government should redouble its efforts using all the levers that are currently available to it. When will the Deputy First Minister respond to those points?

In opening the debate, the Minister for Children and Young People referred to the Scottish Government’s ambition that Scotland should become a great place to grow up for every child. Like members across the chamber, Labour members have made clear that we share the minister’s aspiration and welcome those initiatives that play a part in transforming the rhetoric in this chamber into realities in our communities, including the lived reality for children in every part of Scotland. In his opening remarks, Neil Bibby said that there was a consensus across the parties on the main points of substance. At times, we heard that consensus, particularly in the speeches of Malcolm Chisholm, Dennis Robertson, Mark Griffin and Willie Coffey. Although we disagree on the constitutional points, I thought that Mr Coffey made a series of important points, particularly about the experience in his constituency. In order for Scotland to be a great place to grow up, Scotland must become a better place to raise a family. Too many parents are struggling to find work to provide for their families. Those parents need access to appropriate education and training—that includes places at college—to maximise their opportunities. Malcolm Chisholm was absolutely right that, for those in work, we need to ensure that work pays and is of a decent quality. Public transport is also important for getting there. Perhaps most important of all, we need to provide for every family in Scotland access to high-quality flexible and affordable childcare. Those supports for families are vital to improving the chances of all our children. There is no trade-off between a focus on children and children’s services and all the other policies that support the good society. Labour’s amendment and our contributions today have sought to make that clear by including an explicit reference to health and, crucially, housing as well as education. It is important to note that our amendment would delete nothing but seeks simply to add that emphasis. In moving our amendment, my colleague Neil Bibby made it clear that Labour also believes that our focus must genuinely be on the life chances of every young Scot. For the children that Mr Bibby and Mr Adam represent in Ferguslie Park in Paisley, for the children whom I know Anne McTaggart spends time with in Drumchapel and for the children that Mr Doris and I represent in Glasgow—for all of those children across Scotland—our focus must be on their life chances. We must recognise that the support that is required to make a difference will not be the same in every part of town or even for every family living on the same street. We also know that the inequalities that children face because of the financial circumstances of their parents are increased when a child is looked after by another family member or by the state. For children with disabilities or for children in families where someone else experiences a disability, a health problem or—as Annabel Goldie and Mark McDonald quite rightly reminded us—an addiction issue, the challenges of life are greatest. Those children are in need of support that targets their specific needs. Labour’s amendment also makes reference to two specific reports, which we were disappointed were not highlighted by the Scottish Government. The first of those is the Joseph Rowntree Foundation report “Monitoring Poverty and Social Exclusion in Scotland 2013”, which highlights the 14-year life expectancy gap between a child from a poor home in my region and that of a child born to a more affluent family. I attended the launch of that report in Glasgow, and Scottish Labour has tried to use the opportunity of today’s debate to remind ministers of the JRF’s clear conclusion that children in poverty should not have to wait for independence, which was mentioned as the solution by some SNP members—I think that George Adam even described it as the only solution to child poverty.

I will interpret that as Mark McDonald agreeing with George Adam that the only solution to child poverty is constitutional change. That will be disappointing to those outside the chamber who are following the debate. I will come in a moment to the actions and the difference that a Labour Executive in Scotland was able to make. The second report to which we seek to draw the Parliament’s attention is the map of child poverty in Scotland, which was published even more recently by End Child Poverty. That shows that one in five children across Scotland lives in poverty. As Neil Bibby indicated, we will support the Scottish Government’s motion at decision time, but in our view it is remiss for it not to cover the issues of poverty. Although we may have provoked a boisterous reaction from some SNP back benchers, I think that we have succeeded in putting the issues of poverty into the debate. As Neil Bibby said, we will welcome the actions of the Scottish Government where we can, but we will perform our role as an Opposition group by challenging the Government wherever it could do more. On getting it right for every child, we have argued that more needs to be done to ensure that that is genuinely happening in every local authority, town hall and school across the country. I know that the minister shares that ambition. We on this side thought that there was too large an element of self-congratulation in the motion, which seasoned observers of the Scottish National Party will have no doubt been shocked to see. The Government talks about the pace of change. We on this side are not reticent about reminding ministers of our record, which was to introduce free entitlement to early education way back in 1997, just months after winning an election. After six years of the SNP in power, parents are still waiting for those 600 hours of provision. The reality is that too many of Scotland’s children will have grown up in the time that it takes the SNP to deliver on the promises that it has made. The Scottish Government is fond of measuring itself against England; indeed, comparisons with the Tories are the SNP’s favourite measure of social progress—although, on this side, being less bad than the Tories is the least that we expect of the Scottish Government. However, it is its boasts in relation to two-year-olds that ring the most hollow. I think that all the Opposition parties made that point.

No, thank you. Labour members have sought to contrast rhetoric with reality. We have no problem judging ourselves against the same standard that we ask of the Scottish Government. In the past week, Nicola Sturgeon has claimed that, in an independent Scotland, child poverty will be not only abolished, but banned by the constitution. On this side, we represent the party that legislated to abolish child poverty. Achieving that aim has not come from an act of Parliament, but progress has flowed from the policies that we used the machinery of Government to pursue. The previous Labour Government lifted 600,000 children across Britain out of poverty and gave them a chance in life. I say to Mark McDonald that it was through the previous Scottish Executive working with and in the UK that child poverty was reduced further and faster than in any other part of the country. That is exactly the type of competition that Bob Doris seemed to be calling for. Enshrining progressive ideas in law is not a bad idea, as long as the record matches the rhetoric spouted. Irrespective of the pressures facing families in my city or in any other part of Scotland, child poverty figures have flatlined recently. That is not all the SNP’s fault—I never said that it was. It is also not the result of coming welfare reform changes—the Government’s record cannot be the result of changes that are only now coming in. However, that flatlining is happening on the SNP’s watch, which is why we must test the Government’s rhetoric against the reality outside the chamber. I therefore urge members to support Neil Bibby’s amendment.

It is.

The biggest challenge faced by my constituents and thousands of defence workers in Glasgow is the future of the Clyde yards, 90 per cent of whose work comes from the MOD. Will the minister explain what information the UK Government has provided to the Scottish Government about the likelihood of the MOD placing contracts for defence ships with what would become, in an independent Scotland, foreign yards on the Clyde? Is it the same information that trade unions have, which is that the likelihood of the rest of the UK placing such orders is basically nil?

Two groups should be at the heart of this debate: the patients to whom waiting time promises are made and the front-line staff who are left to deliver on those promises made by ministers. Like others on this side of the chamber, I have questioned ministers on waiting times on a number of occasions. Although my principal concern has been about what is happening in Glasgow, I have also been in the chamber when colleagues on this side have warned the Scottish Government that things were going wrong and have heard ministers’ denials at every stage of this scandal. On the occasions when I have asked questions on this subject, I have sought a simple assurance that none of my constituents in Glasgow has waited longer than they should have because of inappropriate manipulation of waiting lists. However, despite all the heat and noise that have been generated, I have never received such a guarantee and, given that I suspect that I will not get it from the Scottish Government today, I will tell the chamber what Audit Scotland said on that specific question. In his splendid speech, Bob Doris should perhaps have taken note of that report when he claimed that the figures have always been open and transparent, because according to Audit Scotland: “The actual time patients waited is longer than the waiting time reported in national performance reports”. Page 29 of the report makes it clear that although 3 per cent of patients were officially recorded as waiting more than nine weeks, the actual figure was 23 per cent and that “the biggest difference in the number of patients was in NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde” where the figure was 5,000. Since the initial indications of this scandal, there have been assertions, excuses and carefully worded obfuscations. First, the allegations were simply malicious lies that had apparently been made up by the Labour Party, then they were a small and isolated example of malpractice. Then we had internal reports that, it was claimed, were exonerations of board managers when they contained no such thing. A national inquiry by Audit Scotland has revealed startling statistics including an example at the Western infirmary—a hospital that, along with the Victoria infirmary in Glasgow, is experiencing severe pressures—of 900 orthopaedic patients with painful conditions who were all apparently socially unavailable at the same time. At every stage of this scandal, the Scottish Government and the SNP have denied everything and shouted loudly at anyone who dares to ask them questions. Labour called for a whistleblowers helpline because we did not believe that abuse could be happening without anyone knowing but our request was ignored, then rejected and then finally acceded to only when the denials and inaction became untenable. If I have one quibble with the motion that is in front of us today, it is about its suggestion that “clear” warnings “were overlooked”. I do not think that the warnings “were overlooked”; instead, the warnings and those who made them were haughtily dismissed by the very person who made her own career blaming every dropped bedpan in the NHS on the previous Scottish Executive. The reason that the Scottish National Party is in such a mess on this issue is simple. When faced with a scandal, the former cabinet secretary did nothing but belittle those who asked her for answers when she should have been asking the questions herself. Nicola Sturgeon is not in the chamber this afternoon but the back benchers who cheered and jeered with her then are now having to defend the latest defence. Indeed, it was good to see the Minister for Commonwealth Games and Sport back in the chamber to do just that. In the latest defence, the definitions of unavailability are being rewritten; patients themselves might have caused the problems; targets are being decried as the problem; and computers and IT systems are to blame. As with college funding and blankets on wards, reality is denied until it confronts the SNP in the face. SNP MSPs who a few weeks ago were still arguing that there was no problem are now falling all over themselves to tell us that they actually understand the problem better than anyone else. Neil Findlay was absolutely right. The reality is that there is now a lack of confidence in waiting time data that are provided by the Government. When it was trumpeted that waiting times were falling, social unavailability skyrocketed. When social unavailability was uncovered to be the SNP’s hidden waiting list and it began to fall, the officially approved waiting time figures somehow went back up again. What a surprise. Even now, we are supposed to believe that the problem—which never actually existed, of course—has been resolved, but patients are still facing inequalities in how waiting lists are being managed across the country. The result of the legal right to treatment policy, which the Scottish Government signed off, is that my constituents in Glasgow will receive seven days’ notice of an appointment. In Lanarkshire, the notice is three weeks. I say to Mr Doris that patients in Glasgow will have their waiting time clock reset if they turn down one appointment. In Lanarkshire, two appointments will be offered.

No, thank you. The Scottish Government has approved a new postcode lottery, and my constituents in Glasgow will once again lose out, not least because equality impact assessments have not been carried out. Therefore, patients in Glasgow who do not have English as their first language, for example, will have to work out all of that from an automated letter that has been generated in board headquarters. Finally, I turn to staffing. Under the SNP, there are 2,000 fewer nurses and midwives in the Scottish NHS, and there is severe pressure on hospitals such as the Western infirmary and the Victoria infirmary, where patients are waiting on trolleys in corridors for eight hours at a time. Across Scotland, A and E waiting time targets have not been met since 2009. The Auditor General for Scotland has told us that the NHS is on an amber warning, and the RCN has said that hidden waiting lists should be a wake-up call for the Scottish ministers. In its briefing for the debate, the BMA—doctors in our hospitals—highlights examples of managers who have shouted at clinical staff, and suggests that patients are being inappropriately admitted to hospitals because they would otherwise breach A and E targets. I hope that the Scottish Government will reflect on this debate and the scandal, finally decide to take responsibility, and end the denials and the defence of its own in favour of working with national health service staff to deliver for patients on the promises that it has made to Glaswegians and people across Scotland. Finally, as a trade unionist, I say to the Scottish National Party: stop using national health service staff as a human shield for the political failures of the Government.

Has the Scottish Government taken legal advice on the definition of “bedroom” and will the minister issue guidance on that matter?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the Scottish Government plans to implement new measures to tackle child poverty. (S4F-01196)

Earlier this week, Professor Kate Pickett told Health and Sport Committee members that inequality is a human rights injustice and that it behoves all of us to shout about it all the time, so that solutions can be found. She argues that many different solutions exist at every level—in our communities, in local authority areas, nationally and internationally. Today’s Evening Times quotes Dr John McKendrick of Glasgow Caledonian University as saying: “The evidence is damning. Not only has progress in tackling child poverty ground to a halt, but current levels in Scotland are higher than they were in 2004/5 ... the projections are our poverty shame will worsen as we approach 2020.”

Since we know that some of the First Minister’s flagship policies redistribute in the wrong way, which extends inequality—

—will the First Minister acknowledge the need to re-evaluate his approach?

Seventy per cent of all orthopaedic patients at the Western infirmary were marked as socially unavailable at the beginning of 2011. Nine hundred real people with painful conditions waited for treatment in Glasgow. Some of them might even have been Nicola Sturgeon’s constituents. Does the cabinet secretary not realise that it is not credible to say, and he is making a fool of himself to pretend, that Glaswegians were somehow twice as likely to be on holiday as people in the rest of the country in January and February 2011? Will he now, on behalf of Nicola Sturgeon, apologise to the thousands of patients across Glasgow who may have waited for longer than they needed to?

8. To ask the Scottish Government how the international development priorities of an independent Scotland would differ from current United Kingdom aid policy. (S4O-01806)

Last month, the minister said that a separate Scottish aid programme might go beyond the internationally agreed aid target of 0.7 per cent—perhaps even to 1 per cent, or more. On the basis of our current financial position, what would a 1 per cent commitment amount to in cash terms? Does he consider that, after the costs of setting up a separate Administration, that would be a greater cash amount than Scotland’s current share of UK aid? If so, what other spending would be cut to fund that?

At his last meeting with NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, did the cabinet secretary ask for a full report on the problems that are affecting the assisted conception unit at Glasgow royal infirmary? I am still being contacted by distressed women and couples who have simply and categorically been told that they were unaffected, but information about what has happened at the GRI is not yet in the public domain. As the cabinet secretary will be aware, I have asked his department many parliamentary questions on the issue of access to in vitro fertilisation treatment. Now that, as I understand it, the Scottish ministers have before them the report of the working group that is considering issues around standardisation, can the cabinet secretary give the chamber an update on the Government’s direction of travel?

I thank all those members who supported the motion for the opportunity to have it debated today. I thank particularly my colleague Patricia Ferguson for her support on the issue. She cannot take part in the debate as she is on parliamentary business at the Committee of the Regions. I refer you, Presiding Officer, and members to my register of interests, not as a performing artist but as a past member of the Scottish Trades Union Congress general council, to which the Musicians Union is affiliated. The trades union movement has shaped my politics, and it continues to do so. I take this opportunity to congratulate the MU on all that it does to represent musicians, support a successful music industry and remind us that musicians are workers, too. I welcome to the public gallery Rab Noakes, a member of the MU executive committee, Fraser Speirs and Bill Martin, members of the regional committee, and Jen Hunter, the MU’s regional officer. Music enriches our lives as listeners and spectators. Those of us who can play or who have had the opportunity to learn to do so are enriched. In common with amateurs, many professional and semi-professional musicians love making music, but for most the job of being a musician is unlikely to enrich them in monetary terms. The MU’s excellent publication “The Working Musician” is the culmination of a major research project that the MU commissioned last year. In the document, the MU has brought together some sobering statistics about the reality of life for the jobbing musician, which I will share with Parliament and the public at large. More than half of the musicians surveyed by the project—56 per cent—earn less than £20,000 a year. Almost two thirds of working musicians are not regularly able to contribute to a pension, and 60 per cent of musicians report that they have worked for free in the past 12 months. The evidence detailed in “The Working Musician” is the result of a survey of more than 2,000 workers and in-depth interviews with both musicians and industry insiders. Most working musicians are multiskilled; four out of five have been performing for more than five years; two thirds have invested four or more years in learning their craft through formal training and education; and 40 per cent hold a degree in music. Other self-employed workers face some similar challenges, but the situation for musicians is on a different scale. I mentioned pension contributions a moment ago: at present, one in five of all workers are without pension provision and one in three self-employed workers do not have a pension, but only 35 per cent of musicians pay into a pension. The MU undertook its research because it suspected that the scale of the problem among its membership was large. However, it was also prompted to undertake the research by the explosion in the numbers of musicians reporting the expectation that they would work for free during the London Olympics. The legacy of the cultural Olympiad should not be impoverished music makers. I therefore ask the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs to consider how we should address that specific issue as we prepare for Glasgow 2014. Nearly all of us love music. I enjoy gigs, music festivals and, some colleagues might be surprised to hear, even the odd orchestral performance or opera when I can. We will all have different favourite bands, pubs where we go to hear music, clubs and companies that we support. Why do we all value music, but fail to value musicians? The UK and Scottish music industries are extremely successful. Money is made, but it does not always go to those who make music. UK music exports amount to £17 billion a year. The UK is one of only three countries in the world—the others are Sweden and the United States—that are net exporters of music. Half of all albums that are sold in the UK are recorded by British artists. The British music market is the third largest in the world, and 10 per cent of all the recorded music that is sold in the world is British. In one year, British orchestras played to UK audiences of 4.18 million, toured in 39 countries, performed 457 concerts overseas and generated an income of nearly £150 million. Britain loves music, and Scotland loves music. One of the reasons why I ended up in my city of Glasgow was the live music scene. Glasgow is recognised as one of the world’s foremost musical places, even by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. As Celtic Connections continues in Glasgow this week, so does the rock, pop and indie scene. Glasgow’s music scene is legendary, and it stretches across the whole spectrum, from contemporary and classical to Celtic and country music. Its venues are equally varied, and it hosts an average of 130 music events each week, which is more than the figure for any other place in Scotland. Many gigging artists, session musicians, orchestra players, music arrangers and teachers are told by promoters in the industry and others, “I’ve got a great gig for you. Lots of exposure. A great support slot. But sorry—no pay.” The industry itself has a lot to answer for. My former Labour colleague Pauline McNeill was closely involved with musicians and promoters in efforts to empower artists and improve their working conditions, but there are problems outside the industry, too. Charities are among the worst offenders. Musicians will often hear the statement, “It’s for a good cause.” Most of us will have attended events—we will possibly have paid a ticket price for them—for which the sound person and bar staff have been paid and the venue has been hired, but the musicians have been told, “We don’t have a budget for music.” Fraser Speirs, who is in the public gallery, has said: “The problem occurs when a charity event approaches asking for a band to play ‘just half an hour, maybe an hour at most’ and no fee is available. Often I have financed a four piece band only to discover that the PA company, sound crew, lighting rig and guest speaker have all been engaged at their regular commercial rate”. There is nothing wrong with musicians donating to a cause if they want to do so, but the donation should be just that, not an expectation. Every time a musician gigs for free, the likelihood of others being asked to do so increases. Every time someone has to give up music as a job, every one of us who loves music misses out. Like other workers, musicians are facing tough times. Their income is threatened by illegally downloaded music, which means that they have to rely on live performance fees more and more. Making music can be a career, not just a hobby. Professional musicians are like any other professionals and should be recognised as such. I do not have much more time available in this short debate. I appeal to the Scottish Government to ensure specifically that, wherever music is part of an event that the Scottish Government is involved in supporting, work is not play, and work should be paid.

The Deputy First Minister rightly talks about the 200,000 children who would be at risk of falling back into poverty across the UK, and she has pinpointed 15,000 children in Scotland. How will her solution help the 185,000 children throughout the UK who are not in Scotland?

Family allowance was introduced in 1946 by the great reforming Labour Government, which did so much to create and extend the welfare state. It was replaced by child benefit by another Labour Government in 1975. The last Labour Government augmented support for children through a system of tax credits. Child benefit has, until this month, been paid on a universal basis, with a recognition that, as a society, we all have a responsibility to all the nation’s children. Universal provision has had the effect of tying middle-income and higher-income families into a system of support that is provided to all. It has meant that the administration of the system has been easier, and there is less of a danger of those most in need failing to claim. As the Deputy First Minister rightly said, child benefit has historically been a benefit paid directly to women for the purposes of supporting children. In the overall architecture of our welfare state, it has always been a crucial component of the welfare system. The decision of the UK coalition parties to attack child benefit has been condemned by my party elsewhere, and I am happy to repeat that Scottish Labour regards the changes that have been made as the wrong approach. One of the tests that should be applied to any universal provision is whether its application to all makes it easier to reach those most in need and whether or not the cost of means testing would be proportionate. We in Labour recognise the need for money to be spent wisely. We have always argued that most support should go to those who are most in need. It is regrettable that the reform of child benefit and the callous cap on benefits uprating has resulted in a direct attack on children and cruelty towards the vulnerable, who have been labelled “skivers” by the Tories and Liberal Democrats. The unfairnesses of that are manifest when they are viewed in the round, and particularly against the tax cuts for millionaires. That said, we are wary of parties who have never had to administer a welfare system promising the earth or, as Mark McDonald described it last week, “the moon on a stick”,—[Official Report, 22 January 2013; c 15763.] if only people are persuaded to vote for their constitutional proposition—a proposition that has been the nationalists’ solution to every problem since time immemorial, and which can in no way be described as an argument for the times.

Labour at Westminster put forward a very clear proposal on the Welfare Benefits Up-rating Bill that the United Kingdom Government could have followed. Because of the changes, 1.2 million families in Britain will lose out on child benefit. According to the Institute for Fiscal Studies, 7 million working households will lose an average of £165 a year because of the upratings cap. Not including cuts to child benefit, new mothers will lose £1,300 during pregnancy and the first year of their child’s life because of the combination of cuts to maternity pay, pregnancy support and tax credits. A further result of the coalition’s changes is administrative chaos. Richer families will continue to be able to claim child benefit, meaning that the state must pay money out and then attempt to claw it back up to the total amount that was paid in the first place. As a result, it is likely that many more people will find themselves drawn into self-assessment tax for the first time. The Deputy First Minister’s motion rightly makes reference to both benefits uprating and child benefit eligibility, and I agree with much of what she has said about both. The coalition parties have sought to turn benefits uprating into a political football, which is regrettable. Their description of strivers and skivers is simplistic and, frankly, offensive to those who are labelled as the latter. Many of those who are affected by the uprating cap are in work, including many whose only benefit might, until now, have been child benefit. Many are out of work, and there is a whole range of reasons for that. The first, it must be said, is a lack of jobs due to the mismanagement of our economy and the stalling of the recovery. I turn now to the part of the Scottish Government’s motion which I find slightly less persuasive than the first. The Scottish Government asserts that the only way to “protect the universal benefits that produce fair and equitable outcomes” is to support the separation of Scotland from the rest of the United Kingdom. There are a number of problems with that assertion, and I fear that members will be well used to spotting them. First, universal benefits on their own do not necessarily produce fair and equitable outcomes. If Scottish National Party members were genuinely interested in a debate on universality, rather than in trying to score political points against Scottish Labour, they would find it in themselves to acknowledge, as they do in the context of policies in other areas, that fair and equitable outcomes are achieved through a combination of interventions, which must include a targeting of the most support at those who are most in need of help.

In a moment, Mr Stewart. At any other time and in any other place, such an approach would not be considered controversial, but to the SNP it is apparently heresy.

I am happy to take an intervention from Mr Eadie. I apologise to Mr Stewart.

The problem is that there is a balance to be struck between universalism and targeting, as members of the SNP know, given that they voted for the legal aid changes in the Scottish Civil Justice Council and Criminal Legal Assistance Bill just this week and given that they have supported changes to the heating programme. My second point about the Scottish Government’s assertion in the motion is that the SNP is presenting us with a solution that does nothing for people who will lose out because of the UK Government’s changes and who happen to live south of Gretna or west of Stranraer.

No, thank you. I am not particularly interested in a debate about the deserving and undeserving poor, but if there are choices to be made I hope that we might at least be able to make them on the basis of material considerations, such as whether a person can afford new shoes for their kid or a meal for a kid’s school friend who is staying over, rather than on the basis of geography and national identity.

The point is that we currently pay into a pot for UK welfare and the SNP is seeking to withdraw our money from that pot. SNP members now like to pretend that their nationalism is about social justice and not at all about nationality, but it is on welfare issues that their argument becomes most contorted. People throughout Britain pay into our welfare state, and removing our money from the pot is not progressive—it is as selfish as the claim that all the problems of the poorest will be solved if only the SNP wins a vote is dishonest. I have talked about the parts of the cabinet secretary’s motion with which I agree and the part about which I remain to be convinced, so I turn to Labour’s amendment. Last week, the Joseph Rowntree Foundation published an important report. The report’s author wrote: “With the political debate dominated by the referendum on independence, it’s important to point out that the issues that are central to tackling poverty, such as health, childcare, schools and housing fall within current legislative powers of the Scottish Government. The problems highlighted in this report cannot wait; action can and should be taken now.” I listened carefully to the Deputy First Minister when she responded to the report in Glasgow on Monday and I have listened to what she has said since then. I listened to what the First Minister said when I asked him a question about the report last Thursday and yesterday I read what he had to say about the issues when he spoke to the Jimmy Reid Foundation on Tuesday. Nowhere in any of those comments did I hear an answer to the central point that the JRF made. Does the Scottish Government accept that it could do more with the powers that it has? When will it go beyond responding to statistics on child poverty and poverty across society that span its term of office by highlighting the likelihood of unwelcome new welfare reforms in future? I quote the JRF again: “it’s important to point out that the issues that are central to tackling poverty, such as health, childcare, schools and housing fall within current legislative powers of the Scottish Government.” I put the quotation in the amendment, too, in case there was a danger of the Scottish Government missing it. In all the time that we have been discussing UK welfare reform in this Parliament, my party and the Deputy First Minister’s party have been fairly well united in our analysis, our concerns and our ambition to do all that we can do to mitigate the impact. The Scottish Government must go beyond blaming others and using the poor as a superficially convenient argument for the powers that it has always wanted. If child benefit were going up and school milk could be laced with honey, the SNP would still want the break-up of the UK welfare state. On welfare reform, we welcomed the plan to plug the gap in council tax benefit, which will be half-funded by councils, but we still have no idea for how long funding will be provided. On passported benefits, we are still no clearer about how longer-term eligibility will work.

I apologise to Mr Stewart. I would have liked to give way to him but I do not have time. I make a serious request to the Deputy First Minister. Why can we not debate with the Scottish Government jobs and training, childcare, tackling health inequalities, the support for vulnerable two-year-olds that the SNP promised, the extra time that general practitioners in the deep-end practices are asking for, addictions services for parents, and support for local councils and communities that are affected by welfare change? Why can we not debate the opportunity provided by devolution to do more to help children in poverty? Those issues, and many more, should be our concerns. I was elected to the Parliament in 2011, and in the time since then we have debated many issues. Some were worthy, but few were as significant as the one that we are discussing in this debate. The only times when we have discussed poverty in Scotland, however, have been in a few debates about the actions of the UK Government. I suggest that, when the JRF tells the Scottish Government that its past actions are failing and that a young boy in the city that the Deputy First Minister and I represent is likely to die 14 years earlier if he is born poor rather than rich, debating what the Scottish Government does not have power over and avoiding scrutiny of what it does have power over is a wholly inadequate response. I therefore move amendment S4M-05521.1, to leave out from “and recognises” to end and insert: “; notes the assessment of Tom MacInnes, the author of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation’s report, Monitoring poverty and social exclusion in Scotland 2013, that “with the political debate dominated by the referendum on independence, it’s important to point out that the issues that are central to tackling poverty, such as health, childcare, schools and housing fall within current legislative powers of the Scottish Government. The problems highlighted in this report cannot wait; action can and should be taken now”, and therefore calls on the Scottish Government to act now and use its powers to tackle poverty and inequality in Scotland.”

The member could perhaps take some time to explain why the Scottish Government introduced means testing into the central heating programme.

5. To ask the First Minister what the Scottish Government’s response is to the Joseph Rowntree Foundation’s report suggesting that a boy born in one of the most deprived 10 per cent of areas in Scotland has a life expectancy 14 years below one born in the least deprived areas. (S4F-01148)

The First Minister is right that previous Governments—both the Scottish Government and the United Kingdom Government working together—have been able to lift a third of children out of poverty. The current coalition Government’s policies make that task harder, but they are not excuses for despair. Does the First Minister agree with the authors of the Joseph Rowntree Foundation report, who were in Glasgow on Monday and who were straightforward in saying that Scottish ministers already have the powers that are needed to make a real difference to health inequalities? The authors were clear that the poor cannot and should not have to wait for a referendum, so does the First Minister further agree that the young boy described by the JRF authors, and many like him, including in my city of Glasgow, need the Scottish Government’s help now? Can we expect any change in the First Minister’s policies or priorities as a result of the report, which recognises that some initiatives, particularly in public health, help the better off most?

Will the minister take an intervention?

I am unclear about whether or not members of the Scottish Parliament who have campaigned for improvement in George Square now support that. I recall that the group leader of the Scottish National Party in Glasgow argued that George Square needed a substantial facelift, not just a revamp. I presume that he now takes the opposite view. Is the minister saying that the changes that have now been proposed are unlikely to have any impact on the TIF agreement that the Deputy First Minister has already agreed with Glasgow City Council? Does he agree that the priority of all parties should be to move on with improvements to George Square—for Glaswegians and to make it a fitting place to welcome our visitors in 2014?

Will Mr Doris explain why SNP councillors in Glasgow originally wanted to cut £220,000 from the social care budget in the budget proposals last year? That would have meant £220,000 less in that budget than Labour proposed. After the SNP conferred with the other groups on the council, a joint opposition budget was presented, which would have cut £330,000 from the social care budget.

Obviously, I am aware of the concerns about the proposals to restructure Glasgow’s learning disability day services. Bob Doris is right to say that service users, their families and those who work in the service will be most affected, and perhaps it is they who are most concerned. Their voices should therefore be heard in the debate. For a range of reasons, the level of need that we face in the city of Glasgow is enormous. As parliamentarians, we need to take responsibility for the decisions that we make that impact on the choices that are available to local representatives on the services that they can deliver. Last year, the Health and Sport Committee undertook scrutiny of the Scottish Government’s Social Care (Self-directed Support) (Scotland) Bill, which the Parliament then passed. Self-directed support and the personalisation agenda that Glasgow City Council is pursuing are closely related. As a committee, we took evidence in Glasgow from representatives of service users and carers, and heard their concerns about personalisation. That evidence reflected an experience that I had shortly after I was elected in shadowing an older carer who looked after her adult daughter. The lesson that I learned from both was that change must be communicated sensitively and must be underpinned by genuine assessment of need and an understanding of the impact that change has on individuals. The other evidence that we heard in Glasgow was from Glasgow City Council’s social work department. The scale of the challenge was made clear. Despite Glasgow prioritising resources for social work services, it has a system that has not provided equity of support and has not always provided the right support for every individual. I mentioned the prioritisation of the budget, which is important. Glasgow does not have a fair funding settlement and it has very challenging savings to make as a consequence. The prioritisation of social work therefore means deeper cuts in other budgets. That is not easy, so let us not pretend that it is. I welcome in particular the fact that savings that might be made by the proposed changes will accrue back to social work services. The £11 million for day centres will therefore remain £11 million that is spent on those services. It is about individual budgets and how specific money is spent, so there is not a cut in that respect. The challenge of personalisation and SDS—which all members in the chamber support and voted for last year—is that, as needs are assessed or reassessed, or as individuals opt to receive support in different ways, the demand for day centres will decrease. The challenge that the Glasgow situation poses for the Parliament is not just in highlighting dissatisfaction with a particular proposal or in respect of supporting the idea that the old way is necessarily the best way; the challenge is to consider the reality of undertaking greater personalisation and SDS. That move will require the reassessment of need at a time of budget pressure and that will be the case across the country.

Absolutely. The Health and Sport Committee discussed that at length when we considered the bill. I absolutely agree that day services will remain vital for those who need them and that we need proper and genuine assessment. We all agreed about that when we considered SDS. There are clear lessons to be learned from the Glasgow experience. Mr Doris’s motion raises issues that Glasgow City Council should consider further before a decision is taken. Some of those issues are contained in the Health and Sport Committee’s report and were reflected in Chris Mason’s comments, which Bob Doris mentioned. A genuine case can be made for considering whether we need a change fund for local councils so that they can better support those who are affected by change. I want to mention the role of service staff. The Health and Sport Committee listened to service users and those who manage services, but we did not spend a lot of time listening directly to those who deliver them. I have discussed the Glasgow proposals with, for example, Unite members who transport service users to the existing centres, and it was clear that they, too, have concerns. Councils need to listen carefully to service users and their families, but I remind the managers of any service that the staff on the ground often have the key knowledge about how to improve their work and that their co-operation in any redesign is often vital to whether it succeeds.

Will the member give way?

5. To ask the Scottish Government when the audit of waiting times for colleges will be published. (S4O-01683)

I am sure that members look forward to the publication of the figures. It has been reported in the media that 936 potential students have been turned away from North Glasgow College. Stow College says that it has turned away more than 17,000 potential students in the past three years. Langside College, Anniesland College, the City of Glasgow College and John Wheatley College all say that they could not accommodate requests, and the City of Glasgow College, which the cabinet secretary mentioned in an earlier answer, says that it has had 8,021 applicants on a waiting list in the past year. When will the Scottish Government be honest and admit that slashing college funding results in fewer opportunities for the people in my city who require a college place?

Will the member give way, on that point?

I am grateful that the motion has been selected for debate and thank all those members who have signed up to both the motion that we are debating today and my earlier motion on the same subject. I welcome to the public gallery Alison MacLean, senior Unite the union official for the finance sector, and Jenni Brown, chair of the National Australia Group committee of Unite and chair of the Unite finance sector committee. I refer members to my entry in the register of members’ interests, which shows that I am a member of the same union. The Clydesdale Bank is an important institution in Scottish banking. It was founded in Glasgow in 1838 and it is the personal bank of many Scots and of many small and medium-sized Scottish businesses in all parts of the country. Since 1987, the Clydesdale has been part of National Australia Group but has retained its focus as a Scottish clearing bank, headquartered in Glasgow, continuing to issue Scottish bank notes and giving support to many Scottish causes. That is particularly true in the field of sport, where it has been a sponsor of the Scottish Premier League since 2007 and of the Scottish Commonwealth games team since 2005. There are 300 Clydesdale branches throughout the United Kingdom, but around half of them are in Scotland and Clydesdale employs 3,670 staff here. For all those reasons and more, it is right that the Parliament takes a close interest in Clydesdale and the workers who are employed by it. In February, National Australia Group announced a strategic review of its UK operations by Clydesdale, including Yorkshire Bank, and I raised the issue in this chamber with the First Minister. At that time, I wanted to ensure that the most robust defence possible was mounted to protect Scottish jobs both because of the value of the jobs to those who do them and because of the strategic importance to the Scottish banking industry and the wider Scottish economy of this Glasgow institution, which has been the subject of previous speculation about National Australia Group wanting to divest itself of the bank. Throughout the review period, I have kept in close contact with the banking section of Unite, and I have asked the First Minister to agree to meet union representatives to discuss their concerns. The Scottish Government met Clydesdale management and I am grateful for that, but I am disappointed that correspondence that I have had with the First Minister appears to indicate that no specific meeting with Unite took place that was focused on the uncertainty that has been experienced by Clydesdale workers. Members who have supported the motion in my name will share my concern about the news that has since emerged from the bank—specifically, the bank’s decision to close a number of financial solutions centres in Scotland. Two business and private banking centres in Dunfermline and Paisley will close; two so-called “satellite” centres at Inverurie and Bearsden will also close; and the business and private bank centre in Stirling will be subsumed into the town branch. Those closures reflect the bank’s desire to cut costs. National Australia Group’s intention is to withdraw Clydesdale Bank and Yorkshire Bank from property development and investment lending and to concentrate their activities on personal lending and private banking accounts. Obviously, I welcome any move that has as its objective the correcting of past mistakes, but the staff who are to retain their jobs will want to be certain that the new course that National Australia Group has set for the Clydesdale is the correct one. Prior to today’s debate, I have been advised by Clydesdale Bank and the union that—and I welcome this—many of the affected staff will have the opportunity to transfer within the business and most of those who leave will do so through voluntary redundancy. However, it is a matter of great regret that some will be made compulsorily redundant. The figures that I have been given by the bank indicate that 20 Scottish staff are to be forced out in that way. I understand that a number of staff from across the United Kingdom who are to leave their jobs will do so today. In some respects, Glasgow is likely to be a beneficiary of centralisation of some of the bank's activities, so I can hardly fail to welcome any new jobs that might be created in, or moved to, my city. However, that does not lessen my concern that, as a result of the changes, the Scottish banking sector will lose almost 100 jobs, which is up from the previously suggested figure of 60. That follows on from the considerable pain that has been experienced by workers at Clydesdale’s larger competitors in Scotland over recent years and, indeed, weeks given the news that Lloyds Banking Group is to close its call centre in Motherwell. It could be said that Scotland will fare better from the changes at Clydesdale and Yorkshire because the majority of the 1,400 jobs that are going will be lost in other parts of the UK—in particular, as I understand it, in the south of England. However, redundancy, whether voluntary or compulsory, will be difficult for many of the bank’s hard-working and loyal staff, particularly—it may be a cliché—at this time of year, although, in truth, to be told that one’s job is no longer required by an employer is always a traumatic experience, whenever and under whatever circumstances it occurs. For many of those who will leave Clydesdale Bank, where they will find new employment is uncertain, and it is concerning that many of their skills will be lost. In seeking a debate in Parliament, I sought to highlight the changes that are occurring at Clydesdale, which essentially involve a retreat by the bank into its traditional heartlands and into more traditional banking products. The bank’s future success is important for its customers, who include a significant proportion of small and medium-sized businesses in Scotland, and as a source of good-quality employment in the banking industry.

I am not aware of all the details of that review, so I would not wish to comment on it other than to say that, by debating the motion in the chamber, my concern is to shine a light on Clydesdale Bank so that we can do all that we can to ensure that the bank remains an important part of the Scottish banking industry. Clearly, maintaining the bank’s reputation in all respects is absolutely vital to that. In closing, I take the opportunity again to urge the management of Clydesdale Bank and its owners in National Australia Group to continue discussing the future of the bank with their staff and with Unite representatives, not least because I know that the many changes to the bank’s internal structures and the need to manage the staff who will remain will require the close co-operation of the staff side if the changes are not to be a precursor to further retrenchment in years to come. National Australia Group also needs to make it clear that it has a long-term commitment to Clydesdale and is not simply preparing to sell up when it believes that the market is right. I urge the minister and the Scottish Government to take a close interest in the decisions that are being taken. A close eye will help to ensure that the Clydesdale Bank remains an important name on Scotland’s high streets, a vital banker and lender to Scotland’s small businesses and a significant employer of bank workers in the years ahead.

The cabinet secretary referred to two reports. I will quote briefly from the Glasgow report, which says: “often little or no detail is recorded in the waiting times system due to systems limitations in the character fields and there is therefore little or no evidence to support the: contact being made with the patient; content of the conversation and the ‘offer(s)’ made; or ‘offer(s)’ being made in the spirit of New Ways Guidance.”

The quotation continues: “As such, there is no way of formally verifying the validity of any subsequent application of ‘unavailability’ without contacting or asking patients.”

Yesterday, at health questions, the cabinet secretary was asked for a guarantee that there was no fiddling of the figures in my city, which is also the city of the previous health secretary. Based on that report, can or will he give that guarantee?

If the Scottish Government has not already raised family visas with the UK Government, will the minister undertake to do so the next time that he discusses the issues with it? A number of members in different parts of Scotland have serious concerns in that regard. Those concerns are also concentrated in particular areas of work. The minister mentioned university students; a large number of people in academia would like to bring their partners or family members into the UK and now find that the UK Government’s changes have almost entirely blocked that, which is very much to that Government’s discredit.

The Deputy First Minister has failed to convince me why she is right and President Barroso is wrong. I therefore ask her a simpler question. What is her understanding of the word “automatic”, and how does it differ from the term “after negotiation”?

I was contacted by a couple this morning who are concerned that they may have been affected by the problems at the Glasgow assisted conception unit, but they have not yet been contacted by the health board. Does the First Minister agree that no women or couples should have their chance of a family reduced by that situation and that, if necessary, some should begin their treatment again? Will he ask the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing to look at the resources available to the board to ensure that the result is not even longer waits for women and couples who are still at the back of the queue for treatment?

The move from face-to-face support to online support has its challenges, of course. Is the minister aware, for example, of the recent figures that I have, which suggest that 83 per cent of schoolchildren in Glasgow are not registered for my world of work?

Does Neil Bibby agree—

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Does Neil Bibby agree that it is precisely in those areas where young people are most likely to find themselves unemployed that we find the lowest rate of high-quality broadband access, at home and often in schools?

Will the minister give way?

I am grateful to you, Presiding Officer. I was not sure whether I would get the chance to speak in the debate, so I am glad that you have managed to squeeze me in. Earlier, we debated the media. In noting the juxtaposition of that debate with this one, I was struck by the fact that, in the Evening Times and STV Glasgow’s online news, barely a week goes by without our seeing news of a violent attack in Glasgow city centre or somewhere in the city. Sometimes, such attacks are connected with prostitution, but there are also stranger attacks and a range of other incidents. We can only guess at the number of women who live in fear of violence behind closed doors, at home. Violence is a whole-of-society issue and one that crosses class. We have talked about the debate on football and whether there is a connection, with increases in domestic violence around football matches. However, we need to remember that violence against women is something that happens in every section of our society, including among groups of men that we perhaps might not suspect. I am also struck by the fact that there was a violent attack in Glasgow this week in which a man was raped. However, we need to remember that 85 per cent of domestic violence is committed by men against women, so a proper effort to tackle domestic violence needs to be informed by a gender analysis. The truth is that violence against women exists in our society because too many of us tolerate it. As Gil Paterson rightly said, it is important that so many of us are here in the Parliament tonight to make our views known. In my view, discrimination against women is a contributory factor to our toleration of men’s violence against women, as is men’s attitudes to the sexualisation of women and girls. We should be prepared to say clearly that sex is not a right and that men have no right to demand it, nor to seek it through violence or the threat of violence. On my way to the Parliament this morning, I listened to my colleague Kezia Dugdale on the radio discussing the issue of everyday sexism. There is no doubt in my mind that there are connections between discrimination, how we view women, the image that we create for young girls and the issues of violence in our society. Recently, I met John Carnochan of the violence reduction unit, and I was impressed by what he told me about the international best practice that exists around encouraging men and everyone in society to interrupt violent abuse where challenging it directly might be not possible. I look forward to the violence reduction unit bringing forward its future work programme and its ideas about how we might implement some of that in Scotland. In my view, violence against women by men is more than a symbol of societal sexism. As Gil Paterson rightly said, violence in our society, in homes and on our streets is not just a women’s issue, but it remains an issue on which a gender analysis is vital. Real men neither hit women nor tolerate other men hitting women. I commend Jamie Hepburn and indeed all the speakers in this debate. Thank you for the opportunity to take part, Presiding Officer.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what funding has been allocated for colleges for 2013-14 and 2014-15. (S4O-01530)

I am sure that we are all looking forward to scrutinising the figures for the following year. Over the summer, I was closely involved in the fight to save Freshlink Foods in my Glasgow region, and the cabinet secretary will be aware of the crisis in the industry in other parts of Scotland. Although we all welcome the focus on youth unemployment, will the cabinet secretary ask his officials to specifically examine what more can be done in future years to support adult returners in areas affected by industrial closure?

I welcome the minister’s amendment 23, which puts the term “independent advocacy” in the bill. I withdrew a previous amendment following the debate at stage 2, in which the minister indicated that he would be willing to think again about the matter. I thank him for his and his officials’ time in meeting me to discuss the amendments last week. The issue of independent advocacy goes to the heart of the values that underpin the bill. As I said at stages 1 and 2, our intention is that those who use the services have choice and control, but that choice and control must be exercised meaningfully. The service users’ needs, frustrations and aspirations must be heard loud and clear during the needs assessment process, which underpins the move to greater self-direction. Amendment 23 will considerably improve the bill as drafted, and the minister has moved some way. I turn to my amendment 1. I will briefly set out the difference between the minister’s approach and the approach that I have taken. The purpose of my amendment 1 is to ensure not only that independent advocacy is enshrined in the bill in name, but that a right of access to it is established for everyone who might need it. Currently, health boards and local authorities throughout Scotland have a duty to ensure that independent advocacy is available in their area. Infrastructure is already in place, but only half the local authorities have advocacy services that are available to service users with a physical but not a mental disability. If the right and the corresponding duty that my amendment proposes do not exist, it is likely that, in half the local authorities, people who think that their voice is not being heard will not be able to find an independent advocate to help them articulate their views in the process. I recognise that not everyone who gave evidence to the committee thought that there was an absolute need for a right to advocacy if there was a clear commitment to the services being in place. At stage 2, some members expressed concern that a right was going too far and that it would place a greater burden on authorities to provide services that would not be necessary for the majority. To be clear again, that would not be the effect of amendment 1. There would be no need for people to see an advocate in order to determine that one was not needed. I said that I valued the minister’s time and I welcomed the progress that we have made. I have carefully considered whether to not move amendment 1 in favour of supporting amendment 23, but my view remains that a principle is being debated. Amendment 23 puts a duty on local authorities to provide information about independent advocacy wherever the council considers it appropriate to do so. I have spoken about the issue to other members who have been contacted by their constituents, and I continue to believe that information about advocacy should be readily available to all and that a right of access to advocacy should exist for all who consider that they need it.

I thank James Dornan and congratulate him on securing this debate on St Andrew’s First Aid and its first aid week. In particular, I thank him for highlighting the origins of the society in wartime. I must say that, because of my ignorance, I had not fully appreciated that, so it was interesting to hear about it. Around the time that the motion was lodged, I was travelling on the evening train back to Glasgow when a call when out for a doctor. When one was not found, the call went out for a first-aider. Some passengers grumbled about the delay, but most of us spared a thought for the train guard. Particularly in this week, we should spare a thought for all workers who are left to administer first aid. We can only imagine how stressful that must be for many of them. I am a former member of the Royal Life Saving Society. For three years or so while I was at school and during my studies, I had the opportunity to work as a lifeguard. Luckily, during that time, there were only a very small number of incidents, but I was always struck by the number of people who told me that they would not know what to do in an emergency. It is particularly interesting that the emergency situations that arose were often more to do with the sweetie vending machine than the pool. James Dornan is right to highlight the specific issues about children and choking and the importance of encouraging parents to understand first aid for their kids. On water safety, I take the opportunity to make a plea to the minister. I am sure that he shares my view that we need to do a lot more to ensure that all children in Scotland can swim when they leave school, which would make a considerable difference to the number of water incidents in which first aid is required. St Andrew’s first aid week is a time to salute volunteer first-aiders. My dad was a St Andrew’s volunteer. As a child, I used to wait for the end of his shift, whether it was at the football, the theatre or a local gallery, to hear where he had been and then to ask him how gruesome any incidents that he had dealt with had been. I remember the uniform that he wore, which was probably part of a direct chain of uniforms going right back to the origin of the society. Thanks to Mr Dornan, I now understand better the role that the society played as a uniformed organisation. I hope that initiatives such as the current television campaign featuring Vinnie Jones, which encourages us all to understand more about cardiopulmonary resuscitation, raise our awareness about the importance of learning first aid and particularly CPR. In turn, that might lead to further recruitment of volunteer first-aiders. I mentioned that children in school should be taught to swim. They should also be taught basic life-saving skills and the importance of first aid. Every child should leave school able to deal with an emergency situation and with a basic understanding of life-saving skills. I have raised that issue with the education ministers through questions, and I appreciate the work that the Scottish Government is doing on it, although I feel that we could do more, rather than leave the matter up to individual local authorities and schools to decide. I thank ambulance men and women across the country; all workers who are qualified as first-aiders; and, particularly at this time, all volunteer first-aiders. I encourage all of us who have previously trained to refresh our skills and those who have not yet trained to take the opportunity to learn more about first aid.

I agree with at least some of what Fiona McLeod said about universal benefits, but she is wrong to say that the targeting of benefits and the universal provision of them are mutually exclusive. Both are required, and the decision on which weapon to deploy is tactical, based on which will be more effective in the given time, with the available resources and to the desired end. To my mind, therefore, there is something not quite right about our debate on universal benefits this afternoon: universalism has been pitched as an idea under threat and targeting is being caricatured. Ideology should never be irrelevant to political debate, but SNP posturing about being the last defenders of universalism is neither helpful nor particularly accurate. In my late teens and early 20s, I avoided dentists. As I got older and slightly more sensible, I opted to return. After my first visit back, I was asked whether I paid for my treatment. I confessed that I did not have any idea whether I paid for my treatment because I had not been since I was a child. I then asked how much it cost and said that I could probably afford to pay for it. Thanks to the Scottish Government, my confusion about charging for dental treatment has been resolved by the motion that we are debating—the SNP is reinventing universalism, restoring the NHS to the heady days of its foundation. However, we know that that is not true. We understand that the NHS will cost more next year but that the money available to pay for it will be less. The question is: what will give? The core of my answer would be a quotation from Nye Bevan, who talked about applying “the language of priorities”, and this statement: “If resources get even tighter and if the cuts agenda continues ... we will have to prioritise on the basis of ... need ... need has to be the key criterion in the allocation of resources.”—[Official Report, Health and Sport Committee, 30 October 2012; c 2905.] That is a direct quote from the cabinet secretary two weeks ago at the Health and Sport Committee.

I am delighted that the cabinet secretary has joined the anti-Angus Robertson faction in the SNP Government. The SNP has said quite clearly that the money would be spent on defence—on guns, soldiers and all those things—in an independent Scotland. I will tell a brief story. At around the time when I was elected to Parliament, an elderly couple were admitted to hospital, where it was determined that they would need long-term care and would not return home. Unfortunately, the husband died within a few days of being discharged after waiting weeks for a care plan to be put in place. The wife fared better, but her daughter was told that she should accept a place in a home without the father. Causing a fuss would result in the elderly woman being boarded around the hospital, with—as the nurse pointedly remarked—all the risk of infection that that would bring. At my surgery, I regularly hear similar stories and complaints about the unfair system of charging and cost cutting in elderly care; we all do. However, that case sticks in my mind because the woman who faced the dilemma was my mum, and the couple who were languishing in hospital were my grandparents. Given that varying tax is not an option—we know that, when faced with the issue of tax, the SNP’s immediate response is to try to cut it—this Parliament of ours operates on a budget that is largely fixed. New tax and borrowing powers will begin to change that but, for the moment, we have what we have. We know that we will have less to spend next year than we did last year. Debating whether everything that we did yesterday is what we should do tomorrow and discussing where every penny of the same money is prioritised to best effect is not the same as cutting; it is doing what we were elected to this place to do. When the history of these years comes to be written, it will be asked how we handled ourselves when the biggest crisis hit. How did we work out what really mattered? How did we ensure that the most vulnerable were not hit harder than ourselves? The SNP has been given the opportunity that few Governments get but which this Parliament was created for: to take the hardest decisions together, and to debate honestly and on the basis of evidence. I hope that its bringing forward of this afternoon’s debate is a sign that the Government is willing to begin to engage on the policies that it trumpets in its motion and the policy areas that it deliberately ignores. If not, people might come to think that the wrong choices were made and that the hard decisions were ducked, all to get a referendum answer that never came. The Auditor General has NHS Scotland on amber warning, but we know that health is not the only area that should be of concern. Free personal care is universal, but dignity in old age is not. Bus travel is free for 60-year-olds who commute to work but, at the other end of the spectrum, vulnerable two-year-olds get less support than even the Tories can manage to provide down south. Tuition is free for university students, but college kids can get on the bus to look for a place. That is the reality of Scotland. College budgets have been cut by a quarter. Local councils are introducing charges for services that are relied on by the vulnerable in our communities—people such as Elizabeth, a constituent of mine who lives at Dundasvale Court in the Cowcaddens area of Glasgow. When she contacted me two weeks ago, she said: “Each time I have had a fall I am referred to the Community Falls Prevention Programme”, which is “a free NHS service” that is offered to people aged 65 and over who have fallen. She went on to say: “In 2004 the occupational therapist who assessed my needs recommended installation of a community alarm to enable me to summon help if required. I used it for the first time on 5 August 2012 when I fell at home and broke my arm and gashed my face. I received a letter dated 15 October 2012 announcing the introduction of a charge, set at £12.00 per 4 week period. This service is offered to people who”— in the words of the service— “live alone, are over 65 years and have health issues that make them liable to fall.” Liz describes herself and people like her as a captive audience for that charge. In my city, where the poorest of our citizens still die earlier, where the neediest are being hit hardest, where the efforts that we made in the good times were not sufficient and where already hard lives are, we know, about to be lived harder, I fear that self-congratulation disguised as ideology will do many of the people whom I represent little good at all. I support the Labour amendment.

I thank the minister for the engagement and discussions that he has had over many months with me and others on the projected closure of the Freshlink factory. The minister will be aware that at a meeting that the First Minister attended, and which was held only a few days before the announcement, there was talk of a new option being on the table and, in particular, there was the prospect of a renewable energy project. Will the minister confirm when the Scottish Government was informed that the company had decided to close the factory and say whether he felt that ABP Food Group took seriously the offers that were being made to it? Secondly, can he confirm whether any of the resource that was identified to support ABP to stay in Shettleston could now be used to support the workers in the community that ABP is leaving behind?

I congratulate Kenneth Gibson and thank him for bringing forward this debate. A few years ago I had the chance to be a bone marrow donor, but that experience is not what I want to talk about today. Rather, I simply say that to put what I will say in context. By making a blood donation, a marrow donation, or perhaps a living kidney donation, we are giving a gift and we are benefiting from a unique and rewarding opportunity. It is a gift that is in our own gift. An organ donation after death should be no different, but Kenny Gibson was right to say that under the current system we have no guarantee that decisions taken in life will be respected in death. We know that 90 per cent of Scots support organ donation, but that fewer than half of us carry the donor card. However, only a tiny percentage of us will die in circumstances in which organ donation might be possible. At present, the gift is not our own, but rather might be for our relatives to make for us. Despite progress in improving our system, the fundamental problem with our register and the way in which we ask people to make this difficult choice remain. I believe that a change from an opt-in to an opt-out register would help to support families who are unsure of what they should do—and we know that many families who say no go on to regret the choice they made for their loved one. Such a change would mean that those who wish to donate could have greater confidence that their wishes would be respected and we know, because the evidence tells us, that it would increase the number of donations. That simple change would save lives. The change would be simple and there is evidence that 70 per cent of us already support such a move, even though we have not yet had the detailed debate that might reassure many of those who have concerns. The change is not one that I instinctively supported, but I came to understand it as others helped to bust the myths of so-called presumed consent. Whether there is an opt-in or opt-out register, the fundamental choice remains the same. The choice to give remains something that we should celebrate, not take for granted. Faced as lawmakers with 650 people on organ waiting lists, we have the responsibility not to remove the choice but to make the choice as easy as possible. More than 40 members have signed this motion—I make an effort to sign as many of Mr Gibson’s many motions as I can—and almost 60 of us signed a previous motion recognising the Evening Times campaign on this matter, which was supported by 10,000 of the paper’s readers. With the Government’s support, we could make this change and save lives. I called the change simple, but I acknowledge that reassurance would be required. As Patricia Ferguson and others have pointed out, safeguards would be complex; new procedures would need to be detailed; and, as Kenny Gibson rightly made clear, a significant public information campaign would be essential before we could use any new register. Even if we all agreed today to do this, change would be years off and, in the meantime, more people will die. For that reason, I consider the debate to be both timely and urgent. As the new Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing has previously indicated his personal support for opt-outs, I hope that the minister will indicate when he sums up whether the Scottish Government will introduce a bill to achieve the change that we seek. If the Government is not minded to legislate, I can tell the chamber that I have had initial discussions with the non-Government bills unit and the BMA and am considering lodging as an alternative way forward a proposal modelled on the bill that Labour has introduced in the Welsh Assembly. At this week’s meeting of the Health and Sport Committee, the cabinet secretary said that although he often looked to the Opposition for ideas he very often did not like the ones he saw. In truth—and as speeches from all round the chamber have demonstrated—this is not a party-political matter, but I ask the Government to meet me, perhaps Mr Gibson and any other member who would like to be involved in making this change happen. After all, this change, which is in our gift, would save lives.

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

5. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to address poverty. (S4F-00913)

I welcome the Scottish welfare fund, although the First Minister will be aware that, as a cash-limited fund, it is likely that it will continue to run out before the end of the year. I think that Government officials have already confirmed that. The First Minister will be aware that the “A Wider Lens” report, which was released by Demos and Quarriers this week, indicates that thousands of families are already facing severe disadvantage in Scotland today, including more than 10 per cent of families in Glasgow. Given that progress on reducing child poverty has halted in Scotland in recent years, what does the First Minister consider are the key drivers of change needed by those families and the communities that they live in? What targeted support is the Scottish Government offering to those families and children that might impact on that situation?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what importance it places on quality career guidance for all young people. (S4O-01369)

Can the minister confirm that she is aware that 100,000 young people are to be encouraged to miss out on a face-to-face meeting with a careers adviser as a result of a decision by Skills Development Scotland to introduce a traffic-light system that categorises most pupils as “green”, meaning that they need no assistance in planning for work and should log on to a website if they have any questions, with 35,000 young people who are deemed to be difficult being coded “amber” and allowed to see a careers adviser promptly, and around 300 of the most troubled pupils being labelled “red” and sent to charities such as the Prince’s Trust? Clearly, pupils in different circumstances will need different levels of assistance, but does the minister honestly believe that it is correct that thousands and thousands of school pupils are to be told simply to log on to a machine or, at best, to have a web chat with a call centre, rather than receive face-to-face information, advice and support? If she does not, will she red-light that scheme now?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what recent discussions it has had with trade unions regarding support for international projects in which they are both involved. (S4O-01355)

The minister will be aware of my interest in the Fire Brigades Union’s Palestinian training project that is taking place in Dundee to train some 20 fire officials from the Palestinian civil defence department. What assistance might the Scottish Government be able to provide? Specifically, is the minister examining possibilities for assisting with the accommodation of those officials?

The cabinet secretary used two examples—elderly people and the services that they rely on, and a young person going to university. What is her answer to the elderly person who faces an unfair system of social care charging? What is her answer to the student applying to college this year, under the SNP Government, and not when she was a student applying for university?

Malcolm Chisholm did it, too.

I thank Sarah Boyack for lodging the motion. Students at the University of Glasgow have raised the issues with me, and many of the concerns are common. I want to use my time to talk about why we need people from the broadest range of backgrounds in legal practice. As Kezia Dugdale rightly reminded us, the law is not all about criminal defence—we should be thankful for that—and crime is not simply an issue for more disadvantaged communities. However, it remains the case that people from less advantaged backgrounds are more likely to find themselves drawn into activities that are on the wrong side of the law. Equally, people who live in less advantaged areas are substantially more likely to be victims of many kinds of crime. I am not saying that a person has to live on a council estate in order to understand the issues—I am sure that David McLetchie will be pleased to hear that that is not my argument. However, Jenny Marra and Alison Johnstone were right to remind us that, just as in politics, it helps if those involved in our legal system recognise the communities and families that they work with rather than see them as a class apart. The minister will no doubt argue that a move from grants to loans to assist students studying for the legal diploma will allow us to support more individuals. However, the Scottish Government must recognise that the view of almost everyone else is that the changes will not result in a widening of the mix of people in the law. Since I assume that the Scottish Government accepts—it is well evidenced, as Rod Campbell highlighted—that the law is a profession in which the mix of people in practice is already not as it should be, the Government must then consider extremely carefully the criticisms that are being made of its policy. Students studying law are more likely to drop out of the subject if they come from a poorer background, and students from poorer families are more likely to be concerned about debt. They are then less likely, even at the moment, to try to obtain their diploma, because they are more concerned about whether they will find a traineeship at the end of it. Ultimately, they need to find a job with more urgency than others who can afford to take the traineeship risk. Legal traineeships are unbelievably difficult to find in the current environment. It is to the Government’s great discredit that that is a significant problem in schemes such as the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service scheme, as well as schemes in commercial practice. Law graduates are faced with the likelihood of unemployment at the end of their diploma, which is of time-limited value, or at the end of a traineeship when they find that they have been used as cheap labour and are disposed of for the next trainee. Any new barrier on the route to legal practice will have the effect of making law graduates from less well-off backgrounds less likely to try to enter practice. That is a legitimate concern to which the Scottish Government should listen. I am aware of law students who have argued that the Law Society should abandon the minimum recommended salary for legal trainees because middle-class law graduates think that that is a barrier to small firms offering them traineeship opportunities. The implications of such a move for less well-off graduates are simply appalling: it would serve to extend the iniquities in the profession. I say to the minister, the Law Society, the profession and the universities that they must take heed of Sarah Boyack’s call both for a coming together that recognises that access is being eroded and for a clear action plan to ensure that at the end of the recession we are not left with a legal community that looks more like the profession in the 1950s than the profession in 2005. If that means thinking again about the move from grants to loans, the Government should consider that. Equally, if it means a change in the way in which we train lawyers—a questioning of whether a seven-year journey from undergraduate to practice-qualified solicitor is reasonable and whether we as a society are prepared to support law students in the same way as we continue to support medical students and others—we should consider that.

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention on that point?

Will the member take an intervention?

I will do my best, Mr Hepburn. Given that good news, is the member not astonished that the Minister for Transport and Veteran Affairs did not take the opportunity to come to Parliament to announce the cuts, especially as he had hot-tailed it to Parliament to make the announcement about the investment?

As another member of the Health and Sport Committee, I too associate myself with the remarks that others have made about the clerking team and, as Jackson Carlaw did, pay tribute to Duncan McNeil for the powerful way in which he set out the committee’s approach in examining the bill. In opening the debate for the Scottish Labour Party, Jackie Baillie made clear our support for the Social Care (Self-directed Support) Scotland Bill at stage 1. If the purpose of the bill is to provide a framework for a more personalised system of social care, independent living or, as Richard Lyle would have it, freedom, the key point that the Parliament should understand is the level of service personalisation that users are able to direct already. I thought that Christina McKelvie, Liam McArthur and Mary Fee made it clear that, despite personalisation being a long-held objective of the Parliament, the situation across the country continues to vary enormously. Variation in the services that people choose to make use of is no bad thing and, indeed, creating more flexible services that are better tailored to the needs of individuals is the goal of the proposed legislation. Scottish Labour shares the Government’s belief that the problem, in that respect, is not too much variation in individual care packages but, rather, too much variation in the choice and control that individuals exercise over their own care or support. In the case of those who require support to meaningfully exercise choice and control, the chances of self-direction are often slim. The Government has set out in the bill a description of what a budget for self-directed support could be used for. By enshrining a right to self-directed support in law, Parliament is providing users of social care with a menu of four options. Those were set out by the minister, Richard Lyle, Duncan McNeil and others, and I will not repeat them. The committee heard and, indeed, proactively found, a number of examples of how such an approach—or components of it—is working in different parts of Scotland. However, Parliament should be clear that increasing direct payments—we should not forget that that has been a feature of our social care system for longer than the Parliament has been in existence—should not necessarily be the only or most important goal of self-directed support. Increasing direct payments should not be seen as the only measure of success, or the sole indicator of systemic change. Changes in the process of selecting and, ultimately, procuring social care, will not, in and of itself, lead to an improvement in the standards of social care provided or a better experience for those who are assessed as requiring support. At a time of significant change in the welfare system and budgetary pressures in local authorities, as members across the chamber have said, there is a considerable risk that some will see SDS as an opportunity not to drive up quality, but to cut costs. Malcolm Chisholm pointed out that the bill comes in advance of changes that are needed to ensure adequate integration of health and social care, and that presents a significant risk to the legislation achieving the Government’s intended effects. Scottish Labour believes that the most urgent change needed in social care is an improvement in quality with an emphasis on respect for—yes—choice and control but also for human dignity and fairness across Scotland. To deliver that, Labour believes in a more radical shift towards a national care service, based on local delivery and control, but with minimum standards of care to end the postcode lottery, as Jackie Baillie set out. We look forward to the minister’s continuing discussions with COSLA to ensure that postcode charging becomes a thing of the past. Members have highlighted a number of other areas of concern. Siobhan McMahon talked about the greater focus that is required on how direct payments will be ended, when the need for them has passed. There also remain questions about whether the regulation of those employed through direct payments is all that it should be. Support for carers is spend to save, and there will continue to be questions about whether we are getting the right balance between support to carers and the desire to put the cared-for at the heart of the new regime. Equally, the appropriate role for family members—often—in a system that puts greater emphasis on individuals making their own choices and controlling their own budgets is an issue that I suspect Parliament will return to whether the bill passes in its current form or not, and I hope that the Government front bench will continue to have regard to the comments of both Gil Paterson and Fiona McLeod. The interests of those who work in the care sector should also be considered, as should the regulation of workers such as PAs. As a member of the committee, I feel that it would have been useful to hear more directly, through oral evidence, from people who work in the care sector—I know that we received written evidence from such people. The final and most substantial concern that I want to reflect on relates to the call for an enshrined right to advocacy. As well as having a right to make choices and exercise control, service users also have a right—which they may need—to the appropriate level of support to make their choices and control meaningful, as I said earlier.

I think that Mary Fee made the point when she talked about the relationship of trust that exists between those who rely on care and those who provide care. In that context, the key word in respect of advocacy becomes “independent”. Individuals’ ability to make choices will be heavily influenced by the resource—or the lack of it—that is allocated to them as a result of a needs assessment. It is imperative that that is done properly, with the aid of advocacy, if required, and a system of review. The Government’s working group on appeals and review is welcome but, as Duncan McNeil argued, it is vital that the Government is mindful of the evidence that the committee heard that a complaints procedure is not a substitute for an appeals process. Assessments should be carried out properly in a way that can be monitored and challenged through a review process that recognises that circumstances can not only change but be misunderstood. As the committee made clear in its stage 1 report, and as the debate has highlighted, the changes that are contained in the bill present significant challenges for service users and service providers, and it is the view of the Scottish Labour Party, in common with the Scottish Independent Advocacy Alliance and many other organisations, that support should include making independent advocacy available by right and ensuring that proper funding is available to local authorities to successfully promote and deliver self-directed support. In supporting the bill at stage 1, I do not quite echo Richard Lyle’s call of “Carry on, minister.” Scottish Labour urges the Scottish Government to ensure that the best possible system of support is created to deliver effectively the changes that ministers seek to make.

5. To ask the First Minister what steps the Scottish Government is taking to address the growing demand for food banks. (S4F-00851)

Benefit issues are indeed the reason most often given for needing a food parcel; however, a significant percentage increase last year was as a result of unemployment. The Scottish Government has important powers to assist job creation and could do more to promote the living wage to help the 50 per cent of those receiving food parcels who are actually in work. When will the First Minister set out his plans with COSLA to use the new powers and resources that he is getting through the successor to the social fund specifically on crisis loans to tackle a situation that the new head of Citizens Advice Scotland, Margaret Lynch, has rightly described as “Dickensian” but which this Parliament should understand as a call to action?

Will the member take an intervention?

15. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to ensure that postgraduate students are able to access the funding necessary for their studies. (S4O-01240)

I have been contacted by a student who wants to study for an MSc in educational psychology. Although the SAAS will provide a small loan, the amount will not cover her course fees, never mind the other living costs that she would accrue. If my constituent lived in England, her fees would be paid and she would receive bursary payments. Will the minister confirm whether the training and recruitment of educational psychologists is a priority for the Scottish Government?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Is it in order for so few members of the Government to be in attendance for the debate, given the serious and important concerns that the previous speaker just raised? The First Minister appeared to be present purely to have his photograph taken. The Deputy First Minister opened the debate today but has now left us.

It is customary to congratulate members on securing these debates and to remark on the importance of what is being discussed. It is a custom that is largely followed regardless of whether the topic being debated is of any real interest or relevance to anyone beyond the constituencies and regions of a handful of members. However, on this occasion Ken Macintosh has brought forward a debate in the chamber that is not just relevant, timely, interesting and important but potentially revolutionary—if Mr Macintosh will forgive me for calling him names. Congratulations should also go to Oxfam for the work that it has done and for the way in which it has brought the ideas to public prominence. Oxfam describes the humankind index as being “about valuing the things that really matter to the people of Scotland” including “social relations ... health and skills ... physical environment ... natural context, and ... financial assets.” Those ideas are not unique to Oxfam—they are part of a wider and growing movement in research, presentation of information and campaigning that seeks to challenge how we value the real wealth in the world around us. Similar ideas have been expressed around the creation and maintenance of more equal societies, and broader measurements are critical to being able genuinely to understand and promote preventative spending measures. As Ken Macintosh said, it is welcome that even the UK coalition, not a Government that is known for doing much to promote wellbeing, has at least signalled its intention to begin measuring the very things to which it is doing so much damage. The Scottish Government’s own Scotland performs system is a welcome but limited example of those ideas being taken up by the state. Like Mr Macintosh and Mr Park, I am not yet convinced that measurements made in that process are genuinely driving policy choices in Scotland, but I am hopeful that it will become increasingly more useful. I also hope that the suggestions made by Oxfam—and supported by an impressive list of others—for changes to the national performance framework have been taken on board. I am sure that the cabinet secretary will say more about that in his closing speech. It is a sign of the widespread interest in and appeal of the measures that, as others have said, so many organisations have sent members briefings for the debate. They include the church, as Patrick Harvie importantly reminded us, the voluntary sector and trade unions. Conversations around better and more real forms of measuring success and lack of success are commonplace in the voluntary and campaigning sector and also among health promoters, of whom I used to be one. The Labour movement and before that the anti-slavery movement grew out of ideas that people were worth much more than their productivity as workers. It can be too easy for the left to glibly accept initiatives such as the humankind index and assume that they simply reinforce our own world view. In fact, the challenge is just as much to us and others like us who believe in decent work as a route to a better life. At this time, when, as the humankind index tells us, 43 per cent of Scots report a fall in their personal sense of financial security, job creation is a vital responsibility of Government. The view that promoting economic growth as measured by GDP is the way to do that creates a challenge for us, as it can reduce all policy decisions to what is best for growth, which can then become about what is best for business or best for Government. The humankind index encourages us to remember that the creation of a better country means better lives for people—not just a long dance with powerful and persuasive interests that is justified on the grounds of job creation. Oxfam Scotland describes the humankind index as measuring what makes a good life. At the beginning of a new session and on a day when we have been debating the Scottish Government’s legislative programme, Ken Macintosh has done the Scottish Parliament a service by bringing forward the debate.

8. To ask the Scottish Executive when it last met the chief executive of Scottish Water and what issues were discussed. (S4O-01206)

Earlier this year, the First Minister mooted the idea that Scottish Water should be able to raise and borrow money from the markets or, in other words, that Scottish Water should be transformed into a so-called public interest company. Does the cabinet secretary agree with the trade unions and others that that model is simply privatisation by another name? Does he agree that the Scottish people are entitled to know whether the Scottish Government has any plans to sell water and waste water services to contractors and to transfer control of water from the public sector to the markets?

The purpose of amendments 1 and 2 is to ensure a more appropriate level of scrutiny of the regulations that will emanate from the bill. If agreed to, both amendments would require regulations to be subject to affirmative rather than negative procedure. The issue of the use of negative or affirmative procedure for subordinate legislation does not usually excite the interest of many members of the Parliament, far less those outside it. However, the matter has been discussed at some length by the Welfare Reform Committee and debated at stage 2, and I have brought the amendments back at stage 3 because there is still substantial support among stakeholders for a greater degree of scrutiny of the regulations than that proposed by the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy. As this is an enabling bill, the regulations that arise will form the main substance of the interaction between welfare reform and links to passported benefits. As a former member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee, I understand that there are three types of procedure for dealing with such legislation: negative, affirmative and super-affirmative. Instead of seeking to lecture those more experienced than myself, I will simply trust that members across the chamber understand the differences between each. Suffice it to say, however, that moving from negative to affirmative procedure would mean that the regulations would become subject to a vote in Parliament. Stakeholders who have made representations to the Welfare Reform Committee and who have lobbied in support of amendments 1 and 2 are concerned that the regulations should be right as well as timely. The timescales for both negative and affirmative procedure are the same—40 days—and many of the charities and others who support the amendments initially preferred the use of super-affirmative procedure to guarantee maximum scrutiny and the widest possible consideration. However, they have come to accept the compromise of affirmative procedure because they are as concerned as the cabinet secretary is that the tight timescales to which the Scottish Government must work are adhered to. I agree with them for the same reason, and because I was concerned that the use of super-affirmative procedure would not provide Scottish ministers with all the flexibility that they may need. The timetable is essential to ensure the continued provision of passported benefits when the United Kingdom welfare reform changes come into force. It is also necessary that consideration is concluded before the new financial year. “The traditional approach to welfare reform—which focuses on a framework in primary legislation accompanied by multiple regulation-making powers—can undermine parliamentary scrutiny.” Those are not my words, but those of the Joint Committee on Human Rights, which published a critical report on the United Kingdom Welfare Reform Bill, which should serve as a warning to the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government against their repeating the same mistakes. The cabinet secretary indicated at stage 1 that over the summer she would seek views on the regulations. I, and others, welcomed that at that time, and do so again today. I note that she has published a consultation on the subject. I would be grateful if, when she responds to the points that I have made so far, she would indicate whether she has now ruled out consulting on draft regulations, in favour of asking open-ended questions. If there is a will to work together on the issue of procedure, I am sure that a way can be found to make the affirmative procedure work, and the debate can then move on to matters of greater political principle. I move amendment 1.

The debate has reflected our previous discussion of the issue at stage 2, but I felt that it was important for the Parliament as a whole to be consulted about this key matter of contention. It would perhaps be excessive to advocate the use of super-affirmative procedure for all regulations that emanate from the bill, which is an approach that many stakeholders originally supported, but a less onerous procedure such as the one that I have suggested is, in my view, a reasonable proposition. In their report to the committee on the differences between the legislative processes, the clerks made it clear that a 40-day period applies in relation to affirmative and negative instruments. The cabinet secretary explained the circumstances in which the coming into force of an instrument earlier than that is triggered. I continue to believe that the use of affirmative procedure would encourage the Scottish Government and all stakeholders to ensure that we get the regulations right and that vulnerable people have continuity of benefit provision.

I would rather not, if Mr Hepburn will excuse me. Stakeholder groups that work with vulnerable clients who need continuity in the provision of their passported benefits are calling for affirmative procedure to be used to afford the greatest level of parliamentary scrutiny. The Parliament should follow an evidence-based approach to policy making and in the scrutiny of legislation. In the debate on the matter at stage 2, Jackie Baillie suggested that we should listen to those who work on the front line. The vast majority of organisations that are involved in this area have called for the use of affirmative procedure, including Children 1st, Citizens Advice Scotland, Barnardo’s, One Parent Families Scotland and Capability Scotland, which said this week in its briefing: “we would have preferred the super-affirmative procedure”. Also this week, Inclusion Scotland said: “We appreciate the urgency to draft the regulations in good time ... in part because of this urgency we urge the greatest scrutiny possible to mitigate against any unintended but damaging consequences. Any small error could cause far-reaching impacts for disabled people but also in the longer term for local authorities and others.” I remain more convinced by the arguments of those front-line organisations than I do by what we have heard today. Therefore, I intend to press amendment 1.

I add my support for amendment 8 and thank the cabinet secretary for making her officials available to discuss the amendment with the Scottish Labour Party. As the cabinet secretary said, it moves on from a previous amendment that Labour members lodged and supported at stage 2. I congratulate the cabinet secretary on the consensual way in which she has handled the issue and faced down the opposition at stage 2 of the SNP back benchers on the Welfare Reform Committee, who were utterly opposed to the amendment.

The purpose of amendment 3 is to require the Government to lay a policy statement before the Parliament to explain the intended effect of the regulations that will emanate from the bill. Capability Scotland said of my amendment that it is vital that the Scottish Government prepares a statement that spells out its overall intention on welfare reform and its approach to passported benefits, among other things. Many of the groups that have been lobbying Parliament about the bill are deeply concerned about the potential for regulations to make matters worse for vulnerable people in Scotland, rather than better. Barnardo’s Scotland, Children 1st, Citizens Advice Scotland, and One Parent Families Scotland signed up to a joint statement that was circulated to all members this week. It stated: “It is unusual for any bill to be laid before the Parliament without the context provided by a policy statement, telling us the purpose and the objective of ministers’ legislative intentions and where the bill sits within the ministers’ overall policy context. Given that this legislation takes on responsibilities that flow from a UK Government law, understanding the policy context within which the bill sits is arguably even more important than usual.” Amendment 3 is a redrafted version of a previous amendment that was defeated by SNP members at stage 2. It has been redrafted to make it as palatable as possible to the cabinet secretary, and to take account of the few issues that she raised against its passage at stage 2. Like my previous amendments, amendment 3 has wide support among the people who are most concerned with the impact of the bill, and I have yet to hear any good argument against the proposal, which is modest and reasonable. I move amendment 3.

The cabinet secretary refers to the attitude of parties in this chamber to the continued reservation of welfare matters. However, as the bill is geared around devolved benefits, that analysis does not stand up. It is important that we have a clear statement of intent from the Scottish Government that sets out its vision for how the bill, and the regulations that will emanate from it, will mitigate the effects of welfare reform, if that is its intention. That applies to all regulations coming from the Government. I always have confidence in the cabinet secretary’s intentions, but we must be clear that all ministers are bound to introduce regulations that seek to mitigate where possible. At stage 2, the cabinet secretary had the opportunity to offer an olive branch on the issue, which she did not take, and no attempt was made to work with us on that. On that basis, I press the amendment.

Does the cabinet secretary believe that there might still be a place for draft regulations as part of that consultation?

In its stage 1 report on the bill, the Welfare Reform Committee referred to the evidence that it had considered as “unrelentingly depressing”. As we come to the conclusion of the Parliament’s consideration of the bill, we start to look towards the future and, as the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations has said, we begin to think about moving from process to principle. In the three debates that we have had on the subject of welfare reform in this session so far, beginning with the issue of the legislative consent motion and then consideration of the Scottish Government’s legislative proposals, Labour and Scottish National Party members have been largely united in our opposition to many aspects of the reforms to our welfare state that the coalition Government has embarked on. At each stage, however, we have been at pains to point out that elements of the changes could have been an opportunity to make the welfare system fairer rather than more draconian. People across the United Kingdom and here in Scotland want a system of benefits that ensures that support is provided to those who need it when they are unable to work or unable to find work. At the heart of our welfare state should be a contributory principle that makes clear our duties to pay in when and if we can in order that we receive assistance when it is needed. Too many of the changes seem to be based solely on a desire to bring down the benefits bill, rather than seek the right balance between support that is affordable and support that is there when anyone needs it. In the stage 1 debate, I quoted Ian Galloway of the Church of Scotland church and society council, who said at the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland this year: “If austerity means that we all have to tighten our belts, and perhaps especially those who can most afford it, then so be it. But what is really happening is that the most vulnerable are being punished out of all proportion.” That concern, which has been highlighted by groups representing disabled people, social landlords, childrens’ charities and many others, was one of the major influences on Scottish Labour when we argued that the LCM on welfare reform should not be nodded through and that distinct Scottish legislation should be brought forward if required. The resulting bill is, of course, as the cabinet secretary said, enabling legislation that is concerned with putting in place a framework for how regulations will be brought forward that connect both devolved and reserved benefits. So-called passported benefits are rightly at the heart of the issue. Capability Scotland, for example, has pointed to the blue badge parking permits, bus passes, leisure cards and energy assistance programmes, because eligibility for each is assessed through receipt of a UK welfare benefit. However, the truth is that the impact of welfare reform could be so large that even at this point we still do not know the true extent of the problems or the opportunities that it may create for the Scottish Government, local councils and others. The Welfare Reform Committee suggested that some £2.5 billion could be taken out of the pockets of poorer people in Scotland. In Glasgow, which the cabinet secretary and I represent, as well as in many other areas, it will also mean that money will be taken from shop tills and from social housing providers. Labour supported the general principles of the bill at stage 1. Throughout stage 2 and in our amendments today we sought to improve it by advocating the concerns of those most closely involved with the delivery of services and the representation of those groups most affected. It has been a good process and the Government has engaged with the issues. We did not seek to lodge amendments that did not have the support of people in the sector. For example, there were concerns about the wide-ranging nature of the regulatory powers that ministers were taking without there being any sunset clause. However, we decided not to lodge amendments on that or on other possibly contentious issues.

I am grateful to Sandra White for that intervention. Of course, the Prime Minister removed a reference to regional benefits from a speech this week. It seems that the SNP is the primary proponent of regional benefits and, indeed, regional pay across Britain. Notwithstanding my disappointment that the cabinet secretary did not accept my amendments earlier, I am grateful to her for the work that we have done together to ensure that the choices that will be made are based on evidence, modelling and reporting on the impact—despite the objections of SNP members of the committee at stage 2. For the avoidance of doubt I should make it clear that the Scottish Labour Party will support the bill at decision time. In the earlier debate I said that we should remember that this will be a unique piece of legislation and the cabinet secretary has outlined that that is her view too. The legislation began life with a partial—but unprecedented—rejection of an LCM, which Labour pushed for. It resulted in the establishment of a special committee, which was pushed for by the voluntary sector. There has been a wide-ranging and vital engagement in the issues—despite the sense of urgency hanging over us to get the legislation right and to get it in place quickly. The work of the Welfare Reform Committee will no doubt go on. In many respects the detail of what will happen next will have to be worked out over the summer and considered when the Parliament returns. Indeed the cabinet secretary indicated that there will be further consultation into the autumn. For their part, many of the charities with a close interest in the bill have turned their attention towards implementation. There has already been some debate about what that might mean, including in the pages of Third Force News. Labour considers that receipt of universal credit or personal independent—sorry, independence—payments should become a passport to devolved benefits. I have obviously been listening to the psychologist too much and I cannot say that word now either. We also believe that all those who are currently eligible for a devolved benefit should remain so. In the stage 1 debate I asked the cabinet secretary to consider the position of advice services and to right the wrong that the Scottish Government has been involved in by pocketing the money for advice services that arises from the UK welfare reform changes. I pointed to the example of the Welsh Assembly Government, which has invested considerably in its citizens advice bureaux to help them to cope with the huge increase in demand that welfare reform will no doubt create. There will be difficult choices ahead in this process and the test, in my view and in the view of Labour, will be whether those choices are made fairly and not arbitrarily. The bill is not one that either the Government or the Opposition would wish to be necessary, but it is necessary. When passed, it will mark the beginning of a new phase of considerations when we should look for opportunities to improve what we do, rather than just shore up our own parts of the system in the face of cuts coming from elsewhere.

I am grateful to be called to speak in this important debate and congratulate Patricia Ferguson on securing it. The issue of college cuts has probably been one of the biggest in my postbag over the past year, and I am sure that other members will have been similarly contacted. However, over recent months, the e-mails have changed from expressions of uncertainty and unhappiness about the Scottish National Party’s cutting of college budgets in general to students asking for my help with specific instances of how the SNP’s cuts are affecting their courses or their ability to enrol in certain courses, because those courses are disappearing altogether. Scotland’s colleges play a vital role in our communities and can provide transformational opportunities for young people and others by providing training for work as well, as education for its own sake, in a way that is accessible to the widest possible range of potential students. Not all colleges provide the same courses and not all courses need to be on offer at every college. However, in the case of North Glasgow College, I have been contacted by current and prospective students who had planned to study music production. Many of those individuals come from the north Glasgow area, but many others come from further afield, including one who e-mailed me from Inverness. Music production is a popular course, but it is a competitive subject choice, and one in which opportunities are limited. North Glasgow College has a good reputation in the subject and I am pleased with the efforts that the management of the college have made to sustain their involvement in that subject. The college has excellent music facilities that I understand were recently praised by the Deputy First Minister when she was on a visit to the college, I presume that she was unaware that the SNP’s college cuts would affect their future use. College cuts also have an impact on the FE workforce. It was therefore disappointing that, last year, when the Further Education Lecturers Association organised a meeting with all Glasgow’s MSPs to discuss the impact of college cuts in Glasgow, not one SNP member of this Parliament showed up to defend the cabinet secretary’s decisions on college cuts. In securing the debate, I believe that Patricia Ferguson has provided an opportunity for the SNP to come clean about the impact that its college cuts are already having on communities. Although I always listen to SNP back benchers seeking to take the party politics out of a situation when they do not wish to defend their Government, I have to say to Bob Doris that, in reference to ILAs, which he mentioned, he should carefully consider the changes to ILAs that will come in on 1 July and which will have a serious impact on students’ ability to continue their studies. In a time of high youth unemployment, cuts to Scotland’s colleges and courses such as those that are offered at North Glasgow College are nothing short of a disgrace.

The cabinet secretary knows of the good work that is done by community social enterprises, such as the Dumbarton Road Corridor Environment Trust in my region—Glasgow—where neighbourhood recycling is particularly challenging. What support can the Government give to such groups to encourage greater take-up of recycling?

Will the member give way on that point?

I am grateful to speak in this debate, which has proved to be interesting and informative. I congratulate John Mason on securing the debate. In terms of the motions that Mr Mason brings before Parliament, he is probably one of the most interesting members we have in this parliamentary session. I congratulate him on raising a subject that is worthy of debate in this chamber. The death penalty is never justified although—as others have said—it has existed in different parts of the world at different times. John Mason correctly outlined that point at the start of the debate. Patricia Ferguson spoke in a bit more detail about the history of the death penalty in Britain, which sobers us before we seek to lecture other parts of the world about how their judicial systems work. In my view, judicial killing never represents a justified sentence in a fair legal process, for reasons that others have outlined: first, because it is an ineffective deterrent, and secondly because it is an action that cannot be overturned. Those two fundamental reasons go to the heart of why we should campaign against the death penalty wherever it remains. I add my voice to those who have congratulated Amnesty International and the campaigning that it has been involved in around the world, particularly on this issue, for about 30 years. I do not think it is for countries such as ours—particularly with our history—to tell others what to do, but on this issue there is a role for Governments to put pressure on our friends around the world and to encourage them at every opportunity to respect human rights. In taking part in this debate, I simply want to add my voice to the congratulations that have been extended to the Sikh community in Scotland on its campaigning on the issue. I am sorry that I was not able to be present when they staged their protest at Holyrood, but I know that other members—particularly Glasgow members—who spoke at that event were mindful of the importance that the Sikh community, especially the community in Glasgow, places on this case. When I visited the Nithsdale Road gurdwara on the south side last week, the issue’s importance to the community was evident. It is offensive that executions take place but, in my view, it is as offensive that the concept of death row should exist and that a death sentence can be passed even if an execution is not carried out. I am sure that the minister will tell us that the Scottish Government raises the issue of human rights whenever it interacts with Governments around the world, and I hope that it continues to do so.

The cabinet secretary will be aware of the proposed changes to the criminal injury compensation scheme. He will also be aware that, in written questions, I have asked him to detail what discussions the Scottish Government has had with the Ministry of Justice about criminal injury compensation. Is he supportive of the reforms that have been proposed to what is a key part of the support that we offer victims?

I am grateful to be called to speak in this debate and to follow the previous speakers, particularly Linda Fabiani, who I thought made an impassioned case for the reasons why she believes what she believes. If the First Minister had followed suit, the debate might have had a slightly better tone. I respect the SNP’s position on independence for Scotland, even if I disagree with it. It is legitimate to argue for a separate Scotland. I have no fear that a Scotland outside the UK would not be able to survive; I simply take the view that a Scotland working in partnership with our neighbours could be even more successful.

I have just begun, so if you will forgive me, I will continue. I said that it is legitimate for the separatists to argue their case, but it must be argued; it cannot simply be asserted as we have heard in this debate and earlier today. There are serious questions that those who promote change must be able and prepared to argue, but so far we have seen precious little attempt to do so. The celebrities at the cinema were not keen to answer questions about what independence might mean for Scotland and, as Johann Lamont said, on television just a few days ago the Deputy First Minister was unable to answer more questions. Similarly, just yesterday, the SNP was unable to answer in the chamber basic questions about how Scotland might have weathered the current euro crisis. It is perhaps one benefit of putting the proposed referendum off that the Scottish Government will have a long time to think about and cobble together some answers to those questions, because the people of Scotland are already asking them. I say to SNP back benchers that the questions will keep coming from the people of Scotland.

I do not intend to set out the policy priorities of the Labour Party in an independent Scotland that I do not believe will come into existence. The argument that it is incumbent on us to argue for what we would do after something that we do not believe in comes to pass is completely illogical. I appeal to SNP members to grow up and to take the debate slightly more seriously. The delaying of the referendum is a shame, but I welcome the fact that I and other members who were elected last year will be in the first generation of members of the Parliament who can look forward to a clear answer to the constitutional question, one way or another. All my life, support for a separate Scotland has hovered at around a third, while support for the SNP has fluctuated, so I do not think that it is very likely that Scotland will choose to leave the United Kingdom. However, I do not take that for granted, and we will have to wait and see. Although I lack faith in the SNP’s prospects, particularly in light of the strength of its current arguments or assertions, I do think that there is an opportunity to ensure that a rejection of separation is not just a negative result for the SNP.

I would prefer to carry on, Mr Hepburn. This debate and the eventual referendum could be an opportunity for Scots to affirm our place in Britain. Given that ordinary people in this country were not asked by the previous Scots Parliament, of which the First Minister is so fond, for their views on the treaty of union, the debate could just as much be an opportunity for Scots to democratically join the union rather than leave it. The Britain of 2012 is a different place—as it will be in 2014—to that which was created in 1707, just as the Scotland of today is a different place to the Scotland of 1999. I was a schoolboy when this place was created, and all my adult life this place has existed and taken decisions—some good and some bad—but they were decisions taken for Scotland, here in Scotland. The union of today recognises the will of the Scottish people for a Parliament of their own. Home rule within the union is in my view the best of both worlds. Devolution has allowed people who live in Scotland, who, as the First Minister puts it, care most about Scotland, to take decisions. This place has led the UK with action on land reform, smoking, free tuition, protecting our national health service from marketisation, concessionary travel, personal care, opening railways and creating a national theatre. To pretend that the Parliament is impotent is to do down all those achievements. I am proud of devolution and of the role my party played in delivering it, but I do not think that we on this side of the chamber should or can sit back. I welcome a debate about powers for this Parliament. The modern call for a Scottish Parliament came out of the Upper Clyde Shipbuilders and the destruction of industries like coal and steel and the communities that relied on them. It was as much about factory closures in the 1980s and 1990s and the campaigning of the labour movement as it was about emotional or cultural nationalism. It is true that the world has turned many times since those issues dominated debate in Scotland, but as someone whose school playground was in the shadow of a shut pit, the story of devolution is not, in my view, finished. The Glasgow that I represent is an uncertain place for many, and changes in who does what may be needed in the future. However, much more important than the question of who does what is the question of what is to be done. This debate is distracting us from that question. I recognise that the SNP has a mandate to put the question about independence, but there is frustration among people in Scotland that will continue—the SNP has to accept that.

Of course, Presiding Officer. The convention scheme that created this place was well worked out and understood, and a Scottish Parliament with tax powers was voted for by the people. In contrast, the separation case is vague and often vain. The reality is that we can share power and devolve it from Holyrood as well as to Holyrood.

I am sorry, Presiding Officer. In my view, the campaign for Britain is a positive one, and it is one that we will win.

Will the member give way on that point?

Will the member give way?

I am grateful to Mr Gibson for taking the intervention. However, he cannot argue that he wants to have a positive debate, then call the leaders of the Opposition parties Tweedledum and Tweedledee and say, “And if we don’t vote for independence it will be you unionist parties’ fault.” There will be a referendum in which people will make their choice. He cannot have it both ways.

Will the member take an intervention?

1. To ask the Scottish Government how it promotes arts and culture in partnership with local authorities. (S4O-01049)

I welcome the initiatives that the cabinet secretary has highlighted. The cabinet secretary will be aware that my colleague Patricia Ferguson recently raised with her the issue of incentivising and supporting local authorities to continue to invest in the arts, even when budgets are tight. In my region, Glasgow City Council has a proud record of support for the arts and culture. Has the cabinet secretary raised the issue of local authority arts budgets with her appropriate ministerial colleagues? Does she believe that the cuts to local arts budgets are having a major effect on cultural provision across Scotland?

We have had a useful debate. It started off lively, but we have been moving slowly towards consensus. We have made a lot of progress since we first discussed this issue last year and then, most recently, about five months ago. I add my thanks to the committee convener, committee members and the clerking team. I particularly echo the appreciation from the Labour seats and around the chamber for the work done by many people in the voluntary sector, who, for a protracted time, have had to prepare information and evidence on the impact that welfare reform will have in Scotland—even if that evidence has been, in the words of the committee, “unrelentingly depressing”. Earlier this week, I had the privilege of attending the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland. Ian Galloway, convener of the Kirk’s Church and Society Council, addressed the coalition Government when he said: “Austerity is a word we hear a lot at the moment. It has a sort of moral, stiff upper lip quality about it. It sounds like something that might do us all good. The reality is somewhat different. Food banks are opening across the UK at a rate of one every four days. If austerity means that we all have to tighten our belts, and perhaps especially those who can most afford it, then so be it. However, what is really happening is that the most vulnerable are being punished out of all proportion.” Tory and Liberal members may not like to hear that—as Kevin Stewart and Jamie Hepburn have pointed out, Liberal members so dislike hearing about it that they will not listen to it—but that view is shared by not just the church, but many, if not all, of the members on the Labour and the Government benches. The welfare reforms will cut support to some of the most vulnerable people in our society, and the committee is right to highlight its grave concerns about the impact that cutting £2.5 billion worth of benefits will have in Scotland. I am pleased that, as a Scottish Parliament, we have a clear majority for seeking to mitigate the worst effects of some of the most disgraceful changes that the coalition parties are seeking to implement.

The member almost makes a reasonable point. We all expect that there is a role for assessment to ensure that people get what they are entitled to and what they require. There is no role for assessment to be used to harass people or to attempt to punish them through bureaucracy. Labour and the SNP have come together to agree that another way must be found. In rejecting the most offensive parts of the LCM, we agreed to set up a special committee of this Parliament, and the Scottish Government introduced its bill, which we have debated today at stage 1. Jackie Baillie made it clear that the Labour Party supports the general principles of the bill. However, the test should be whether the bill meets the expectations and intentions that we had when we embarked upon the legislative process. We should remember that we have been debating a unique piece of legislation this afternoon, as was highlighted by Michael McMahon and most recently by Elaine Murray. This is the first time that this place has rejected UK proposals in an area where a UK solution would, in our view, have been desirable and where the bulk of power and legislative authority resides at the UK level. At the outset, the Scottish Parliament was clear. We wanted a Scottish welfare reform bill that put in place a framework to ensure that benefits could be provided to those who require them, and a bill that did that in a timescale that met both our needs and, more important, the needs of those people. We wanted a bill that provided new ways of testing eligibility for passported benefits. We wanted clarity to ensure that devolution of the social fund works to assist anyone who needs to rely on it. Most important, we wanted a bill that mitigated the worst effects of the UK Welfare Reform Act 2012 in respect of the devolved aspects. We also wanted an opportunity for public debate about what assistance and support the Scottish Government and local government should provide. We wanted a workable set of proposals that local government and others would be able to implement and which provided the appropriate resources to ensure that they could do their jobs. All in all, that was a lot to expect from a short bill that largely provides enabling powers, and Labour members and others have raised concerns about whether the bill lives up to our expectations of it. We heard concerns from Siobhan McMahon about community care grants, from Anne McTaggart about financial and digital inclusion, from Margaret McDougall about housing benefit, and from both Margaret McDougall and Margaret Burgess about advice services, to which I will return later. In effect, what we have is enabling legislation that could provide interim measures that are designed to safeguard the entitlements of those who rely on any or several benefits that are provided by devolved or local policies. That is welcome. Furthermore, we appear to have support for the principle that new applicants in groups that are currently eligible for a passported benefit should have access to what they need regardless of what future support they might have under universal credit. That is also welcome, if that is what the cabinet secretary is committing to today. We now need much more work to be done on how that future eligibility will be assessed. In that regard, the scrutiny role of the Parliament and the committee that it set up for this express purpose will continue to be vital. The committee’s ability to work together and provide the required level of scrutiny has perhaps not been the best example of how that should be done, as we have heard today. However, it should be a clear conclusion of the stage 1 debate and the debate that has taken place in the voluntary sector that the further powers that the Scottish Government is seeking to take require a robust procedure that involves the affirmation of the Scottish Parliament. All of us who are signed up to doing something about this deserve no less, and the cabinet secretary should welcome the challenges to ensure that we are doing all that we can to mitigate, rather than demand acquiescence to the view that the Government always knows best. Elaine Murray was right to point out that it is regrettable that the First Minister missed the joint ministerial committee meeting today, but I am sure that we are all pleased to see that the Minister for Public Health has hot-footed it back from that meeting. We look forward to hearing what information the UK Government provided. As we heard in the debate, it has been a frustration of the committee that it has not received more information from the UK Government, so I hope that more information was provided today. We should be clear that the consultation that will follow the bill should be as full and active as possible. As Michael McMahon said, it needs to be based on draft regulations. We need to consult on proposals, because people need to know what they are commenting on and what the options are. I commend the Poverty Alliance for its evidence and its participation in the change model, which was showcased recently at the poverty assembly and which is one way of showing how people who rely on benefits should be involved in shaping what happens next. The clear conclusion that I believe should be taken from this debate and from the evidence that the committee heard at stage 1 is that we need to do much more on the provision of information and advice as full implementation of the attacks on our welfare state draws nearer. Margaret Burgess was right to raise that point. Last year, our CABx dealt with 203,462 new benefit cases, which represented a third of their total case load, but in the same year funding for their advice services fell by 9 per cent. All the indications are that demand will explode as benefit cuts are implemented and anxiety about new assessments increases. That could result in advice services in Scotland simply grinding to a halt. In contrast, the Scottish Government is accruing £1.7 million a year in consequentials due to increases in advice service funding in England and Wales. Why are we still waiting for the SNP to pass on that money to the front line? Understanding what is happening to real lives out there is the Government’s test on welfare reform. Arguing over words and lines in a committee report is not the response that Scotland needs from its Parliament. Pocketing cash that could make a difference to the cash in the pockets of real people is not what is expected of the Scottish Government. Further, any attempt by the Government to obfuscate future parliamentary scrutiny of its actions by seeking to make use of a less onerous scrutiny procedure will not do either the SNP or the people whom we are trying to help any good whatsoever. We will support the bill at stage 1, but I hope that the cabinet secretary will reflect seriously on the concerns that have been raised in this debate and that will no doubt be raised as we go forward to stage 2, and try to put in place a bill that can do what we all want it to do, which is to mitigate the effects of the welfare reforms.

Does Mr Don accept that, in itself, simply having more people walking in their community—rather than feeling that they have to go somewhere else, because they do not feel safe in their area—helps to enhance the safety of that area, and that streets and paths that are walked more often become safer just because people are choosing to do that?

Patricia Ferguson, Scottish Labour’s spokesperson on culture and external affairs, has asked me to pass on her apologies. She hoped to take part in the debate, but unfortunately she must attend to an urgent constituency matter. I am grateful to speak in this important debate and I join Sandra White—and others, I am sure, as the debate continues—in congratulating Elaine Smith on securing it. It is the first opportunity that this Parliament has had to debate the broader subject of the United Kingdom’s relationship with the Republic of Cuba, and the Cuban revolution. To focus on the beyond the frame exhibition that has opened in Glasgow, members had the opportunity to view some of the pieces on display when Elaine Smith kindly organised an exhibition space in the Scottish Parliament last week. I hope that the exhibition, which has been given considerable support by the Scottish trade union movement and by Glasgow City Council, is a considerable success. Glasgow has a vibrant and exciting art scene. It is also a very political city, as I was reminded on Sunday when we celebrated May day—international workers day. The combination of art and politics is therefore not an unusual one for Glaswegians. Glasgow is also a friend of the Cuban people. While Alex Mosson was Lord Provost of Glasgow he was instrumental in signing the Glasgow-Havana partnership, which formally twinned the Clydeside to the Caribbean in 2002. I understand that when Alex Mosson shook hands with one Raul Castro to symbolise that agreement, the heavens opened and the Cubans were treated to a good west coast downpour. It was fitting that at that time Glasgow also played host to a festival that celebrated not just Cuban art, but Cuban music. I am sure—and I am sure that Elaine Smith is too, given her reference to it earlier—that Havana Club rum was also enjoyed by many Glaswegians on that occasion and in that celebration. Cuba is a huge country that is much bigger than Britain, but it has a population of just 11 million. The revolution has led to steps forward that socialists on these islands would wish to highlight, such as the high standards of Cuba’s universal healthcare system and its long-standing position as one of the world’s most generous givers of international aid, despite its comparative position as a poor country. The Presiding Officer will be aware that the Cuban people are not able to enjoy the best of relations with all their neighbours, not least because of the hostility to the revolution that still exists in the United States. I had the privilege of hearing Rosa Aurora, the wife of one of the Miami five, speak at the Glasgow May day rally. I note the statement that was provided by Amnesty International yesterday. Of course, Amnesty is not an organisation that has been uncritical of Cuba, and it has raised concerns about human rights, which I would certainly wish to see upheld in Cuba as in any country—that applies just as much to the United States in relation to the Miami five. I associate myself with Amnesty’s comments that the men’s trial was unfair, and I very much hope that the United States will change its policy in relation to Cuba by ending the blockade, and that friendly relations, such as those that the United Kingdom has enjoyed with the island, can come about. In August 2011, the United Kingdom signed a bilateral agreement with Cuba that sought to foster closer relations and partnerships, including in the cultural arena. The Minister for Parliamentary Business and Chief Whip will be aware that I asked the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs in written questions about what the Scottish Government was doing to improve its relationship and to contribute to the United Kingdom’s policy of partnership at that time. I was disappointed by the cabinet secretary’s answer, which suggested that improving links with Cuba, despite the Glasgow-Havana link, was not a priority. I hope that when he winds up, the minister will say a little more about what can be done as a result of the debate and the important visit by Her Excellency the Cuban ambassador to extend a hand of friendship from the Parliament across the Atlantic.

I join Christina McKelvie in welcoming the publication of the report and many of the actions identified in it. However, it was my understanding that the child poverty figures were also due to be published towards the end of the month. If that is now not the case, will the minister advise why, and will he indicate whether he expects that the latest figures will show a decrease, an increase or no change?

Was the member similarly concerned when he heard the First Minister, on his platform at the SNP conference, raising childcare very much as a political issue? Did the member decline to applaud then, or does what he said apply only when other party leaders speak on the subject?

Six years ago, I was part of a GMB delegation that met Peter Hain at the Labour Party conference in Brighton. We met a Welsh secretary of state who was taking action that I disagreed with, and we were led by a Londoner, Paul Kenny, who was the leader of my union. The member’s attempts to portray the issue as somehow involving a lack of concern down south and a lot of concern in Scotland are ludicrous, as are her attempts to turn the issue into a party-political issue. The debate has been consensual. The Scottish Government could use article 19 and do various things itself.

The minister might know that the Welsh Assembly Government has taken the approach of having a two-stage process, which it has published, to examine the impact in Wales. Will the minister commit the Scottish Government to doing the same? As he said, the information is not available.

It is not possible to wholly separate the housing benefit issues from the wider programme of welfare reform. As a member of the Welfare Reform Committee, I have taken a close interest in the cumulative effect of the changes. Taken together, the package represents a serious attack on the principles of a contributory welfare system—a system to which we all pay in when we can in the expectation that we will be supported, at least to a minimal level, when we need help. There is no doubt in my mind that the changes will further increase levels of poverty across Scotland and the UK and in my city of Glasgow. I am aware of constituents who have already experienced hardship as a result of the changes to local housing allowance. I am particularly concerned about the impact that that will have on women and children. Maeve Sherlock outlined many of the reasons for that in her excellent speech in a debate that took place last year in the House of Lords. Anyone who is not convinced by the seriousness of the risks that the changes pose should read her demolition of the UK Government policy in Hansard, in which she describes how single mothers will be forced from work and from their local area, where they might rely on other family members to support childcare. That could happen because of a cut of just £12 a week, an amount that Baroness Sherlock rightly says could just as well be £1,200 to a mother on a low income—£12 a week could be the cost of a pair of children’s shoes or of putting a family meal on the table. The changes to housing benefit will force families to move. In my area, that is likely to mean that single people without children who are on low incomes will be shunted into the city from the surrounding areas. In Glasgow, there are more than 1,500 single housing benefit recipients who are aged between 25 and 34. They could be forced to move from communities in which they might have grown up to something that is frankly close to a ghetto. The likely beneficiaries will be the private landlords who make money from cramming people into tenement flats that have been designated as houses in multiple occupation. I do not have time to discuss the hugely disturbing effect that the changes will have on social landlords. Their risks will rise and their incomes will fall. The higher levels of rent arrears and the cost of recovering rents will diminish their capacity to borrow to fund new housing or improvements to existing stock. That is before I even get to the economic and, just as important, social cost of eviction. As members have said, we in this Parliament should be concerned about the impact that all that will have on our efforts to beat homelessness. I commend the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee’s report on the 2012 homelessness target. In Glasgow, we have the highest level of homeless applications, but we are already 90 per cent of the way towards meeting the target. We have rightly closed large-scale homeless hostels, but there is a real danger that they will return because of the shortage of temporary furnished flats, which are the key option in eradicating homelessness. In my view, therefore, the housing benefit changes represent the single biggest housing policy intervention in Scotland since the Parliament passed its groundbreaking homelessness legislation. In this case, and particularly for the coalition parties, that should be a cause of shame rather than pride. We have not heard whether the Government will support the amendment in the name of my colleague Elaine Murray, which seeks to encourage the Scottish Government not simply to lament what the coalition is forcing on us, but to produce a clear strategy to mitigate the worst excesses of Tory misrule. My colleague Margaret McDougall outlined a number of areas in which the Government could do that, such as allocation policy and the difficulties with online applications—although, unfortunately, the Scottish Government has cut the budget for digital inclusion. The Labour Party has always argued that the Parliament should have that role should we ever find ourselves in this situation. Today’s poll tax is called the bedroom tax. The Scottish Government claims that it wants control of the whole benefits system, but it must demonstrate its political will with the powers that are already at its disposal to mitigate the worst effects. I take Bob Doris’s point that it will not be possible to mitigate them all, but we need a clear plan to mitigate what we can. In great challenge comes opportunity, but in grasping the opportunity the Scottish Government must understand that it will be required to make choices about its priorities in changed circumstances and that it must put resources as well as rhetoric behind the plan that it must develop and present to the Parliament.

5. To ask the First Minister when the Scottish Government will announce its position on same-sex marriage. (S4F-00548)

Any Scottish Government proposals for equal marriage will have the support of the many members on this side of the chamber and across it who signed the equal marriage pledge. Will the First Minister confirm that the Government will not publish its response to last year’s consultation until after the local government elections? Furthermore, will he indicate whether there is any good reason why equal marriage cannot be achieved before the referendum in 2014?

Will the member take an intervention?

As another member of the Health and Sport Committee, I associate myself with the cabinet secretary’s opening remarks about Duncan McNeil, the members of the committee and the clerking team. Many areas of consensus emerged from the committee’s consideration and scrutiny of minimum pricing per unit of alcohol. We all agreed that Scotland has a negative relationship with alcohol, and that that relationship should be challenged. That is a bold statement. Through its production and sale, alcohol is an important and integral part of our economy. It is a part of life. We drink to wet the baby’s head and we buy pints for our friends, when—if not before—they reach the date of majority. We celebrate success with champagne—or some of us do—and some of us drink to unwind or to socialise in the pub on a Friday afternoon, or we go home to a glass of supermarket wine. After our debates in the chamber this afternoon, many members will head downstairs to mark Commonwealth day. An alcoholic beverage will be offered at the bottom of the steps and a proportion of members will accept a glass, some perhaps keeping an eye out for a second one. Alcohol creates jobs and sustains industries. We know that it is a popular part of life. I do not believe that we need to ban alcohol from this building or from our supermarkets. The negative impact of alcohol comes because of harms that are largely a result of alcohol abuse and overreliance on drink—that is what separates drinking from smoking, at least to some extent. Tackling Scotland’s drinking problem, by which we mean tackling drinking that has become a problem, along with tackling the problems that lead to alcohol abuse and those that abuse can cause, is an issue on which we agree in the chamber. We do not need to divide on it, or imply any division or lack of commitment on the part of others. As a committee, we agreed that tackling problem drinking requires a range of responses. I welcome and agree with much of the alcohol framework, which was written in partnership with experts, and I commend everything that the Government has done to advance that agenda. Similarly, I welcome the proposals introduced by my colleagues Dr Richard Simpson, who is a former consultant in addictions, and Graeme Pearson, who has served at every level of policing in Scotland. They are both much more expert than I am and, indeed, than many of the rest of us are. The Government believes, and the cabinet secretary has argued, that minimum pricing is the most pressing legislative change that needs to be made next, and now. Before I came to this place, I had no strong view on minimum pricing, but I was certainly aware that my party’s opposition to it had not brought us any particular electoral advantage. Now I am here, and find myself a Health and Sport Committee member, and I discover that the majority view of committee members is that the evidence that we received in support of minimum pricing was “overwhelming and compelling”. The witnesses from whom we heard, and their range of views, were interesting, intriguing and persuasive in some cases, but that their evidence was overwhelming and compelling was not the conclusion that I reached. Indeed, when the cabinet secretary gave evidence, she did not claim that an overwhelming and compelling case existed somewhere else in the world, or from hypotheses, to show that minimum pricing would definitely work exactly in the way that a theoretical model suggested, with no unforeseen consequences and no disproportionate impact on those with lower incomes. Instead, she argued, perfectly legitimately, that on balance there was a case for trying the measure, and she accepted that even if it delivered all that she hoped for it would not be a silver bullet. I ask Parliament to draw its own conclusions about how a majority of committee members managed to find the Government’s proposals even more impressive than the Government itself claimed them to be. I do not dispute that there is a link between price and consumption, and I agree that overconsumption can undoubtedly lead to harm. The evidence for both those things is well understood and the world did not need a report from our committee to tell it that. My concerns are not based on the legality or otherwise of the measure, although witnesses did express such a concern. I would prefer notification of the policy to Europe, and I welcome the commitment to that. I would want to have a better idea of how the market might respond. I hope that a sunset clause and proper robust evaluation will help if the market responds in a way that makes things worse by changing pricing structures or the marketing of specific products. However, those problems do not explain my unease about the bill. Increasing by law the price of goods in supermarket baskets will take money from consumers and pass it on to retailers. I hope that that is understood. If someone has money, that is fine, but if someone is on a low income, even if they drink moderately, safely and legally within all the guidelines, they will be disproportionately penalised by the minimum pricing measure. They will spend a higher proportion of their income on their weekly shop, which many of us already find hard to afford. Some, like Bob Doris, see that as a price worth paying to get a particular policy prescription agreed, no matter that heavier and problem drinkers and young drinkers are less likely to be price sensitive or that poorer people already drink less than wealthier people. If someone cannot afford the increased price of your safe and legal tipple, which they enjoy responsibly, then tough—it is a price worth paying because it might reduce overall consumption at population level. I hope that we will all reflect on that when we go downstairs to our next reception or to the bar where we can use our salaries to buy a drink in the full knowledge that the minimum pricing measure will have no impact on us. For the reasons that I have given and others, I support the amendment in Jackie Baillie’s name, which calls for the totality of the windfall that will accrue to supermarkets from lower-income people as a result of the measure to be eliminated by a social responsibility levy, which is a measure that was accepted before. The cabinet secretary has said previously: “we suggested that we work together to use the social responsibility levy to claw back increased revenue for reinvestment in our services.”—[Official Report, 10 November 2010; c 30143.] However, what is the Scottish Government’s position now? It has no plans to implement the social responsibility levy. Without a proper measure to claw back the windfall that will go to supermarkets, minimum pricing is not just a tax on the poor but a simple transfer of money from the poor to the rich.

I welcome the resources to which the cabinet secretary referred. He will be aware that the number of households that are experiencing fuel poverty is rising. In light of that, does he believe that the 2016 target to eradicate fuel poverty is achievable? If so, what additional action will be needed to reach it, given that the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee recently reported that the financial resources fall some way short of what is required?

Kezia Dugdale shared with us the information that 95 per cent of contracts for the Olympics included the living wage, and the minister argued that that might not have been achieved through a legal process. Can he give us any examples of contracts in which the Scottish Government has actively encouraged contractors to progress the issue of the living wage?

5. To ask the First Minister whether the timetable for reform of the children’s hearings system has been changed. (S4F-00503)

The national convener of Children’s Hearings Scotland was removed from her post at the beginning of December 2011. A week later, I asked the First Minister whether the timetable was on track, specifically for area support teams to be in place in January 2012. He said: “I can give the assurance that the timetable has not slipped and will not slip”.—[Official Report, 15 December 2011; c 4770.] This weekend, it was reported that the board, which suspended the national convener, is drawing up contingency plans to retimetable the reform process. If there is a problem at Children’s Hearings Scotland, the Minister for Children and Young People should account to Parliament for it. However, if there is not a problem, when will the national convener be allowed to return to her post to get on with her job of supporting some of the most vulnerable children in our society and leading a hearings system the backbone of which consists of volunteers, who are left worrying about the mess that the children’s minister has allowed to develop at Children’s Hearings Scotland?

11. To ask the Scottish Executive what progress it has achieved in tackling poverty. (S4O-00717)

The minister will be aware that I have asked the Scottish Government and the First Minister on a number of occasions about the tackling poverty board and the role that it plays. I cannot understand why that board has not been meeting regularly; I understand that its last meeting was on 13 April last year. It could have a role in monitoring the progress of the Scottish Government’s achieving our potential strategy, given the change in economic circumstances since the strategy was agreed. Can the minister confirm whether the board has met more recently than 13 April last year? Are there any plans to arrange a meeting?

Presiding Officer, you will be aware of the uncertainty that is facing thousands of Clydesdale Bank workers. Clydesdale Bank is headquartered in Glasgow and is a major employer across Scotland. It is a strategically important company for the Scottish economy, and it is the bank of many small and medium-sized businesses. Following the Scottish Government’s reported contact with Clydesdale Bank, what assurances can the First Minister offer its workers and their families, who face an uncertain beginning to 2012 as a result of the statements from the parent bank, National Australia Bank? Specifically, will the First Minister agree to meet Unite the Union, as representatives of the workforce, to listen to their fears and hear at first hand their suggestions on how the long-term future of the business as a Scotland-headquartered company can be secured?

Will the member take an intervention?

The cabinet secretary rightly mentions the amount of money that is spent, particularly in higher education. He will be aware that I have previously raised with him the issue of Audit Scotland’s scrutiny of spending in higher education. Does he expect that to be taken forward? Following on from Linda Fabiani’s question, what assurance can the minister give us that negotiations on college mergers will not be influenced by the ambitions of college principals in relation to potential salaries or, indeed, severance payments?

As the cabinet secretary says, 2012 is the year of the London Olympics. She will be aware that there has been some controversy about the Olympic rings coming to Scotland. Is she aware that Glasgow City Council has also requested the Olympic rings and suggested that Glasgow is an ideal site? Does she agree that George Square or the squinty bridge would be an ideal location for the Olympic rings in Scotland given the connections between Glasgow 2014 and London 2012?

Will the member take an intervention?

Scotland is not making the progress on tackling child poverty that either the First Minister or I would want to see, but I look forward to the Government’s report on its child poverty strategy in March. On the broad issue of the anti-poverty strategy, “Achieving Our Potential” was published in 2008 and since then we have had recession, budgets, spending reviews and cuts. A lot has changed between 2008 and 2012. Will the First Minister therefore commit to looking again at the approach—not necessarily a root-and-branch review, but some consultation and a refresh—to ensure that the priorities of the tackling poverty board and the Government are still right and that the policies are still achievable and, indeed, on track?

I am grateful to be called to speak in the debate. I thank Patricia Ferguson for lodging the motion, congratulate her on securing the debate, and thank her for bringing the slightly bizarre position of the Scottish National Party in Glasgow out into the open in the Scottish Parliament. I regularly use the Queen Street to Waverley service, and would certainly welcome quicker journey times and improvements to the line. The Glasgow to Edinburgh route is the most important strategic rail route in the country, but any improvements to the line that would reduce the service that is provided to passengers on the Queen Street to Anniesland line through Maryhill in the manner that has been suggested would be completely and utterly unacceptable. I congratulate Patricia Ferguson on raising the concerns that she has raised on behalf of her constituents as the MSP for Glasgow Maryhill and Springburn. In a recent debate on the cities strategy, I pointed out to the cities minister that stations in cities are close together for a reason. Transport Scotland has completely cocked up its consultation by including the Glasgow stations beside the suggestion that there is somehow an overprovision of rail services and/or stops in Glasgow. The SNP’s record on rail services for Glasgow is poor, and the wrong-headed, wrongly focused and wrongly conceived consultation from Transport Scotland is just the latest example of that. I have no shortage of letters and e-mails from rail users in Glasgow that make their real anger clear. Time is short in the debate, but I want to specifically mention the correspondence that many of us have received about the Glasgow museums resource centre, which is near Nitshill station. The centre manager, Gareth James, said: “The location of the station in Nitshill does not need altering. The Office of Rail Regulation figures show that Nitshill station has seen an increase in traffic of over 25% in two years and 50% in five years ... This part of Glasgow is poorly served by public transport—no Sunday rail service and a bus service that has recently been truncated further”. Scottish Labour raised the issue of bus regulation this morning, of course. Mr James also said: “the train station is unmanned and does not have step-free access on the south-bound platform. Quite the opposite from closure, at this time Nitshill station would benefit from investment, particularly with regards to making it more accessible.” He is right, as is a woman from Mosspark to whom I have spoken. She regularly walks from that station in the dark in the evening, and she is extremely concerned about the threat to her safety as a result of having to make a longer journey. Glasgow City Council is right to condemn the consultation, and the Evening Times was right to launch its save our stations campaign. The question that the minister must answer in his closing speech is why a suggestion was made, in a fact sheet that accompanies the “Rail 2014” document from the Scottish Government’s transport agency, that threatens the future of Ashfield, Barnhill, Duke Street, Gilshochill, Kelvindale, Kennishead, Maryhill, Mosspark and Nitshill stations. What is the difference between the 14 stations that are mentioned in the fact sheet and the other 50? Why are those 14 stations mentioned in the fact sheet and not the others? Bob Doris said that he was reassured by the discussions that he has had with the transport minister. I am sorry, but why, then, does he have his picture on a leaflet that is being put out by the SNP in Glasgow entitled “Save Our Stations”? The leaflet is not about improvements to stations; the title is “Save Our Stations”. That is also the title of the Evening Times campaign. Why have SNP members who represent my city bounced around accusing Councillor Alistair Watson, who first raised the issue, of scaremongering over the SNP’s difficulty? Why did they deny that any threat existed?

Why did they then start to provide quotes to the Evening Times, saying that the matter was very serious? Yet again, the SNP has let Glasgow down on railways. Is it not about time that SNP back benchers who represent Glasgow started to stand up for their city rather than scrabbling around to defend their Government?

From answers to parliamentary questions, we know that the Scottish Government spent at least £400,000 on its last historic consultation—the national conversation—not including staff time. How much more public money will be spent on the independence question between now and the spending limits coming into effect? Will any Government money be spent on supporting others, including groups outside Parliament, to develop almost-but-not-quite-independence options?

Scottish Labour welcomes the debate and the publication of the strategy for cities, which can help to shape the Scottish Government’s cities policy and provide a framework for strategic collaboration between city authorities. Since the abolition of the cities growth fund, to which the Labour amendment refers, there has been a complaint from Scotland’s cities that the Government does not always understand the challenges and opportunities that our cities present. Our cities are the powerhouse of Scotland’s economy. As the cabinet secretary said, they are our major population centres and 86 per cent of us live within an hour’s drive of a city. Our cities are home to many of our most important cultural and intellectual institutions, and they are our major transport hubs. In the modern economy, we must harness the potential of such advantages to ensure prosperity through innovation and growth. We need design and planning, not accident and by-product. We are not seeking to pitch one part of the country against another or to put undue emphasis on the urban over the rural. Rather, we acknowledge that the success of Glasgow, Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Dundee, Inverness and Stirling can not only improve the wellbeing of the people who live and work in those cities but drive forward the prosperity of the city regions and the whole of Scotland. We debated cities strategy briefly in the opening days of this parliamentary session, in the context of a wider debate about the cabinet secretary’s portfolio priorities. During the debate, the cabinet secretary talked about bringing forward a stand-alone debate on cities strategy as soon as possible, and it appears that today is the first opportunity that she has had to do that, as she said. During the debate on the cabinet secretary’s portfolio priorities, I expressed hope that the Parliament would be an active partner with the cabinet secretary in developing her new area of work as cities minister. It is slightly unfortunate that our first chance in that regard comes after the strategy has been published rather than beforehand, which would have enabled us to inform the strategy. Members of all parties could have contributed usefully to an earlier debate. However, we can make a useful contribution at this stage, too, and I accept the cabinet secretary’s comments about the collaborative approach that she wants to take in the spirit in which I am sure she made them. Scottish Labour particularly welcomes a number of aspects of the cities strategy. I am pleased that it will continue to be led by the cities themselves. Given the work that SCDI did on the six cities review, I welcome its continued involvement and its role as chair of the leadership group. The cities minister’s role should be as an enabler and occasional fixer in times when a lack of joined-up government means that the priorities and problems that the cities might encounter are not understood. This is the first debate on cities in this session, but previous Governments were not silent on this area of policy. Labour’s cities growth fund, which the Scottish National Party scrapped, provided £173 million between 2003 and 2008.

I entirely accept that point, but rolling the fund into the allocation meant that it was used to pursue the Scottish Government’s priorities, whereas its purpose had been to allow cities to pursue their own priorities. We welcome the cabinet secretary’s announcement of the £5 million cities investment fund and the £2 million for sustainability projects, but we must regard the funding in its proper context, which is the scale of the future resource that might be required to do the policy justice. It is a matter of regret that the Government has not taken the opportunity to restore the cities growth fund, as Labour said it would do in its manifesto. Members will have read the briefing from the Scottish Wildlife Trust, which describes the approach to sustainability as a missed opportunity. I have raised the issue with the cabinet secretary in written questions, to which she has responded. I am glad that the Government has responded by providing a dedicated funding stream for projects that will promote sustainability. That element of funding has significant potential, as it could encourage collaboration between our six cities to determine what could be done to make them greener and to share learning between them. The original £5 million amounted to just £830,000 per city. We have several questions about how the fund will operate, and the cabinet secretary alluded to where we could look for more detail. The funding is to be used to prepare business cases in order that other moneys can be leveraged in to support the cities agenda. That might be of more value to smaller authorities than to larger ones, so how will we ensure that we get the maximum benefit in deciding which projects are to be supported? Who will be directly involved in deciding on bids? What criteria will they use? Will only local authorities be able to bid, or will other partners be involved too? SNP back benchers have even suggested that community groups might be able to bid. I appreciate that the cabinet secretary said that the Government will consult the cities on some of those points, but I hope she agrees that a good starting point for the strategic use of what is a welcome but small fund would be to use the criterion that was applied by the previous cities growth fund, whereby projects had to be of regional significance and benefit. The Scottish cities knowledge centre is a welcome development, and I congratulate Glasgow and St Andrews universities on it. Evaluating and understanding what works and undertaking comparative work on what is being done elsewhere will be valuable and essential in ensuring the future development of the cities agenda. That is perhaps more important than ever in a time of straitened public resources. I hope that those with an interest in developing a bolder cities policy can look forward to some imaginative reports emanating from those experts. You would be surprised, Presiding Officer, if I did not mention some of the priorities that my, and indeed the cabinet secretary’s, city—Glasgow—might wish to be part of the debate. On connectivity, Labour again urges the Scottish Government to investigate all options to provide support for air route development. Glasgow City Council has stepped in to provide a small fund in the absence of a national scheme. Although the council is to be congratulated on that, the fund does not replace the support that Government previously provided, and it cannot alone ensure that our key transport and business hubs are connected to the markets around the world where opportunities for increased trade exist. That is one of a number of areas in which the strategy does not go as far as it could have done. It does not respond to the calls from Edinburgh and Glasgow for further reform of the disbursal of business rates. There is no mention of surface public transport links, particularly a link to Glasgow airport, which remains a key missing link without which the city cannot grow properly. Indeed, a link to regional and national public transport infrastructure could benefit the whole country. Today’s debate comes at a time when Glasgow’s newspaper, the Evening Times, has launched a campaign to save stations on the rail network because Transport Scotland seems to have misunderstood the very nature of an urban environment and has identified rail stops as being too close together. Of course they are close together. That is how people live in a city; indeed, it is probably one of the definitions of a city. In Dundee, there have already been calls for the fund to be used to create a jobs task force, and in Edinburgh we need action to tackle the fact that the capital has the highest percentage of unemployed 16 to 24-year-olds. Aberdeen and Inverness desperately require improvements to their trunk road connections, but on a slightly smaller scale, they also require assistance to link the major trunk roads within their city boundaries at locations such as the Haudagain roundabout. The Deputy First Minister’s appointment as cities minister has perhaps been branded by more cynical types than me as part of the SNP’s local government election campaign. Only last weekend, she was pictured with her group of wannabe city fathers at the Glasgow campaign launch. I say “city fathers” advisedly, because it appears that the SNP forgot to select many women to run for the council. If the agenda for cities is the opening salvo in the campaign, I am afraid that the Deputy First Minister’s bang has been somewhat undermined by the lack of buck provided. The Scottish Labour Party welcomes this slightly overdue debate, and we welcome the publication of the strategy, as far as it goes. We would have welcomed an investment fund that was more akin to the cities growth fund. The purpose of our amendment is to highlight the level of ambition that that fund demonstrated, which goes well beyond what the cabinet secretary outlined today. I hope that, during the debate, there will be some support for more ambition. Getting support for Scotland’s cities right could help us to get much more right for Scotland’s economy. In each region, there are opportunities to do more. We must recognise that, as the cabinet secretary rightly said, the publication of one document and the creation of one strategy group to talk about the big ideas that we need are not enough. We need the big ideas to be advanced now. We hope that the cities alliance will set out a radical vision that is bold enough to make clear the tools that it needs to really do the job. I move amendment S4M-01740.1, to insert at end: “; further recognises that this new fund builds on the success of the previous Cities Growth Fund, which provided substantial and targeted support for the development of Scotland’s cities amounting to £173 million between 2003 and 2008, and further welcomes the initiative as a renewed focus on the actual and potential contribution of Scotland’s cities to economic prosperity and job creation through better connectivity, sustainability, better use of knowledge and improved liveability for all those who live and work in Scotland’s cities, their regions and in the country as a whole.”

I commend to the member the Glasgow Economic Commission, which has involved the private sector in its work; indeed, the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce is one of the key partners. It is not entirely accurate to say that business is not interested in certain strategic decisions if there is an opportunity to allow it in.

The member can correct me if I am wrong, but has the SNP group in Glasgow City Council not expressed concerns about that project? It has not supported a speedy resolution to the matter at all.

I am grateful for the opportunity to speak briefly in an important debate, which is attracting considerable interest in the Parliament, on the subject of contemporary music in Scotland and the specific issue of “Introducing in Scotland”. I congratulate Joan McAlpine on securing the debate and all those who have been involved in the campaign. As an avid listener to “Introducing in Scotland” for many years, and as a keen gig-goer, I fully support the sentiments that Ms McAlpine expressed in her motion and I enjoyed her speech. I also associate myself with the remarks that she made about “Newsweek Scotland” and “Scotland at Ten”. The contemporary music industry in Scotland is often overlooked, but it makes a significant contribution to the Scottish economy and to our cultural life. My city of Glasgow is, of course, a United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization city of music. That designation recognises the extent of interest in classical and traditional music but also the importance of the Glasgow contemporary music scene. I listened carefully to Mark McDonald’s speech. As a former student of the University of Aberdeen, I well remember the Aberdeen music scene and Mark McDonald made a cogent case for what happens when something as important as the radio slot is removed from the scene and people have to turn their attention elsewhere. I well recall many long nights spent in Drummond’s in Belmont Street in Aberdeen and many other quality establishments. That is a point well made. Without the opportunities provided by “Introducing in Scotland”, which is based in Glasgow but provides a showcase for talent from all over Scotland, contemporary music will have a very serious problem. In previous parliamentary sessions, Pauline McNeill campaigned extensively with the cross-party group on the contemporary music industry. It developed a music manifesto that focused on recognising the successes of music promoters and the recording industry, and improving conditions, particularly for live musicians. She even arranged for gigs to take place in the garden lobby of the Parliament, which I enjoyed attending. I am sure that, having raised some of these issues again, Joan McAlpine might want to think about what more we can do to promote contemporary music. I was pleased that, during last May’s elections, Scottish Labour was the only party to develop and promote a comprehensive music policy, which included initiatives on instruments and recording facilities. Pauline McNeill was very much the driving force behind that work. “Introducing in Scotland” is a vital part of the Scottish music scene. Many successful bands made early appearances on the show and Joan McAlpine mentioned some of them. More than that, the show has been a showcase for live music, and not just music from Glasgow. It allows listeners around Scotland and in other parts of the UK to hear the best of unsigned talent. Later commercial success is only one element of what makes a band great. I fully endorse the motion. I look forward to hearing what action the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs is taking to put pressure on BBC Scotland or will take if she has not already had the chance to do so. If we were talking about the closure of the BBC orchestra or a reduction in the coverage of traditional music, we would rightly be up in arms. Although I regularly enjoy those types of music, pop and rock is often forgotten by the powers that be, perhaps sometimes because of the stuffiness of the corporation. I regret that I was not able to attend the lobby that Joan McAlpine organised, but if I can help the campaign in any way, I make clear my willingness to do so.

Will Humza Yousaf give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

The debate has been important for the Scottish Parliament. As Jackie Baillie consistently made clear, not least to Murdo Fraser, Scottish Labour supported many of the aims that the UK Government first set out on welfare reform. Like the Scottish Government, Labour saw merit in simplifying the system of support that is available to those who cannot work. In government, we started to ensure that welfare supported those who could work to begin to do so. It is interesting that Jackson Carlaw and Murdo Fraser accused us of doing nothing, while Margaret Burgess accused us of doing entirely the opposite. The truth must be in there somewhere. We hoped that the proposed changes would represent an opportunity to improve rather than threaten the welfare state but, in common with the Scottish Government, we have serious concerns about what is likely to happen because of the bill. Unfortunately, the complex package of reform as well as cuts on which the agenda is predicated undermines the objectives that coalition ministers first advocated. Despite the amendments that were made in the House of Lords and which we welcomed—particularly those on underoccupancy—our view remains that the bill will fail to incentivise work for many and will make life harder and not easier for some of the most vulnerable in our society. When we discussed the bill in the chamber in October, we agreed that we were not minded to support an LCM, because of the bill’s many flaws, which members have again highlighted this morning, and because we wanted to provide time for the Health and Sport Committee as the lead committee to consider the implications for us. I gently remind Annabelle Ewing that that position was taken as a result of Labour’s amendment but, as it is Christmas, perhaps we will let that go.

Okay, Annabelle.

The key point is that we opposed the bill at third reading. We engaged with the bill, although Murdo Fraser and Jackson Carlaw accused us of not doing that. In today’s debate, members have drawn substantially from the Health and Sport Committee’s report. I take the opportunity to pay tribute to its convener, Duncan McNeil, his clerks and all the members of the various committees involved for the detailed scrutiny that formed the basis of the Health and Sport Committee’s report. I also pay tribute to the voluntary sector organisations with an interest in the bill, which have had a huge job to do to influence us here while keeping an eye on what has happened in the House of Lords. The position that the Scottish Parliament took previously concentrated minds and gave us a useful opportunity to consider the options while the committee undertook the detailed work. Jackie Baillie made it clear that Labour agrees with the Scottish Government on the broad response to legislative consent, as outlined in the cabinet secretary’s motion. We agree that consent can be given for data sharing and progress on other matters, and we agree that there is a need for a bill in this Parliament on other devolved aspects. Duncan McNeil spoke well and made clear the tests that we would apply in holding the Scottish Government to account and ensuring that any proposals that it came up with were appropriate and, of course, speedy. I have listened to the argument that some in the sector and some members have made that there is a need for some form of on-going scrutiny of the impact of the changes on devolved services, passported benefits and other devolved competences. I made the point in the previous debate that Scotland has a higher proportion of claimants of every one of the benefits that will become universal credit. A fear is that the cuts element of the changes will have a detrimental impact on the Scottish economy as a whole, despite what Murdo Fraser said.

I want to make a bit of progress, although I am about to mention Jamie Hepburn. I understand why the Scottish Government has opted for the idea of an ad hoc committee, which Jamie Hepburn and Bob Doris encouraged us to have, to examine the impact of welfare reform in Scotland. That was suggested by a majority but not all of the Health and Sport Committee’s members and was supported by some but not all of the groups that submitted evidence. Scottish Labour believes that, in agreeing to such an ad hoc committee, the Parliament should be clear about the work that we expect it to carry out on our behalf. We do not need an alternative work and pensions committee that focuses on reserved benefits or constitutional changes and which would move responsibility for benefits around but do little to improve the lives of the people who are likely to be hardest hit by the changes. Fiona McLeod made that point very well when she said that today’s debate is not about the constitution. Our amendment is therefore intended to be constructive and helpful to ensure that the Parliament has clarity about the committee’s role, and to suggest that the model of working should be genuinely collaborative. We should ensure that we do not put the issues that are likely to arise from the Welfare Reform Bill in a silo. Rather, the committee’s work should be drawn from the experience and expertise of our existing committees and it should provide a forum for a regular check on the bill’s impact on areas in which this Parliament can direct some influence and in which the Government has some responsibility. I say to Bob Doris, who made an excellent speech, that we accept that the Government takes a different view on who should have responsibility for our welfare state. It is the Government’s right to hold and articulate that view, as it is our right to disagree with it. As we consider the next steps, there is a job to be done in focusing on the devolved aspects. Alternative proposals for a way forward must be introduced quickly and in a manner that gives confidence to those who are at present deeply worried about how the changes will impact on them. Siobhan McMahon described the fear that exists out there. I have followed the issue closely over the past few months and it has been a source of frustration to me that the Government did not go into detail in the spending review or in the local government settlement. I recently questioned ministers about whether those who are currently entitled to free bus travel as a result of receiving a disability benefit would keep their bus passes, and was reassured to an extent by the Government’s statement that there were no plans to make any changes. I hope that that was not just a carefully worded reply, and that the Government indeed meant that all those who have a bus pass now will continue to have one. Jackie Baillie mentioned that again this morning, and perhaps the minister could confirm it in summing up. It may be a small issue with respect to the overall changes, but it is important for many disabled people and it is an indicator of the Government’s intent. My colleague Jackie Baillie and others raised concerns about the community care grant, the crisis loans and the devolution of council tax benefit, and again we would be grateful for some clarity from the cabinet secretary when she closes the debate. I repeat our frustration with the UK Government’s approach on welfare reform. I support the amendment in Jackie Baillie’s name, and I urge members on all sides of the chamber to do likewise to ensure that we have on-going scrutiny in the Parliament that is targeted and useful to all those who have an interest in these vital changes. If the Parliament should agree to withhold consent for the UK Government to legislate on all aspects, and instead instruct the Scottish Government to introduce a bill of its own, the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government will both face a very serious challenge to address some of the concerns that have been expressed and to achieve a fair and equitable solution in respect of the devolved aspects. That is a big challenge, but Scottish Labour will engage constructively with the Scottish ministers to find a way through.

Raising awareness is an important part of promoting environmental sustainability in our cities and elsewhere, but funding is also an issue in relation to recycling rates. Does it remain the case that local authorities are funded on the volume of recycling that is currently taking place rather than according to the support that is required, in particular for the tenemental housing in Glasgow, which creates a logistical problem?

The First Minister will be aware of media reports of the suspension of the national convener of Children’s Hearings Scotland and the air of mystery surrounding the situation. Can he confirm to me and the 2,500 children’s panel volunteers, of which I used to be one, that the timetable for reform of the panel system has not slipped and that plans for new area support teams will be agreed by the end of January?

I am grateful to be called in the debate and congratulate not only Sandra White on securing it but the Presiding Officer on having the wisdom to choose Ms White again. First of all, Presiding Officer, I must apologise to you, Sandra White, other members and particularly the minister because, depending on the length of the debate, I might not be able to stay to the end due to a prior engagement in my region. Sandra White will be aware that I, too, lodged a motion to mark the University of Glasgow’s achievement in being ranked first in the UK in a survey of international student satisfaction. As a former postgraduate student at the university, I know well that it offers excellent teaching, research facilities and student support and I congratulate the principal, Professor Muscatelli, and all those at the university for the hard work that no doubt preceded this recognition. I must also recognise the achievements of Glasgow Caledonian University, which has achieved the overall ranking three times in the past and might have expected to keep the crown. In fact, this year it was ranked first by postgraduate students for managing research, learning support and accommodation services. In this debate secured by Sandra White, we pay tribute not only to Glasgow’s universities but to all Scotland’s universities for their work in ensuring that Scotland maintains and improves its position as a first-class destination for higher education. Of course, international students are an important source of revenue for our universities, particularly in postgraduate courses and especially at a time when institutions are seeking to balance their budgets in straitened financial circumstances. However, in acknowledging that economic factor, we should also be clear in our aspiration to make the student experience, student learning and student support the best they can be for international students as well as our own and rest-of-UK students. Sandra White’s motion highlights that 94 per cent of international students who studied at Glasgow said that they were satisfied with their expert lecturers and 91 per cent of final-year students expressed satisfaction with their learning experience. The motion that I lodged notes that 96 per cent of students agreed that Glasgow is a good place to be, as Sandra White said—I am sure that she and I are in complete agreement with that sentiment, particularly on a Thursday evening, when we are both keen to return to the best city in Scotland. The University of Glasgow currently has about 4,500 international students. It is estimated that, on average, each one contributes some £10,000 to the city’s economy. Glasgow gives a warm welcome to all who choose to visit or stay in the city, and I want to express the value that we place on international students as part of Glasgow’s unique cosmopolitan mix. Many international students choose to stay in Glasgow or the UK, but we thank even those whose stay with us is short for everything that they add to our diversity as a city and for the role that they play in our community and our politics. I pay particular tribute to the academic and other staff at the university for achieving the accolade that we are celebrating at a time that I am sure the university management would acknowledge has been difficult for the whole of the university community. I welcome the senior management’s recent acknowledgement that their reform plans went too far, too quickly, as The Herald reported recently. The staff have maintained the quality of education and student experience in what has often been a turbulent time.

The minister will be aware that many disabled people receiving lower-rate disability benefit are concerned that the Government will use the opportunity of the Welfare Reform Bill to remove their access to concessionary travel. Will he guarantee that all disabled people who currently have free bus passes will keep them, regardless of other choices that the Scottish Government makes in relation to passported benefits?

I am slightly concerned that the cabinet secretary seemed to suggest that Glasgow does not need the money. My question is about the impact of welfare reform changes. What contingency has the cabinet secretary set aside to deal with the projected reduction in income as a result of the changes to council tax benefit and housing benefit, which do not seem to be covered in the statement?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Sandra White clearly received the First Minister’s memo this morning about the debate being constructive, unlike Mr Mason and Mr Brodie. Will she take this opportunity to distance herself from Mr Mason’s remarks about his experience of young people in his constituency who apparently do not want to work?

5. To ask the First Minister what action the Scottish Government is taking to tackle human trafficking. (S4F-00316)

I thank the First Minister for that answer, particularly in the light, as Helena Kennedy says in her report, of the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games. There is some urgency around ensuring that our approach to human trafficking is correct, and Baroness Kennedy raises a number of concerns about the interaction between police and the United Kingdom Border Agency, the low awareness of trafficking in Scotland, the definition in law where two offences exist for the same crime, lack of intelligence, lack of prosecution expertise and lack of services for victims. Does the First Minister take the view that there is a case for a review of the legislation in this area and will he ask the Cabinet Secretary for Parliamentary Business and Government Strategy to bring forward an early debate so that parties across the chamber can discuss this very important issue in more detail?

I associate myself with the concerns that Bob Doris expressed. In his answer to Bob Doris and when he gave evidence to the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, the cabinet secretary talked about the risks to the Scottish economy of the welfare changes, but I am concerned that not much cognisance is taken of the issue in the budget. There are only two references in the budget to the welfare reform proposals, and neither is particularly substantial. Will the cabinet secretary take the opportunity to say more about the impact on the Scottish Government’s budget and how the Government is preparing for that?

I am grateful to be called to speak in what has already proved to be an interesting and informative debate. I am grateful to the cabinet secretary for indicating that the Government’s architecture policy statement will be informed by the debate. She might be regretting saying that now, having heard the range of opinions that have been expressed around the chamber. As Jean Urquhart said, beauty truly is in the eye of the beholder—a wide range of views have certainly been expressed today. I draw to members’ attention my entry in the register of members’ interests and, in particular, to my membership of the Glasgow Building Preservation Trust. I noticed that one of the questions that have been asked of new members in recent editions of Holyrood magazine has been what job they might have done if they had not decided to become a politician—or, as in my case, if they became one unexpectedly. I am kind of torn between two responses about my ideal choice of career. One answer is that I would have been in social work, but that does not really help me in this debate. So, I turn to my first choice. Given that as a small boy I had a profound Lego obsession, I would dearly have loved to have become an architect, had I the brains, patience or artistic flair to pursue that. Buildings shape our environment, our working lives and our relaxation. The difference between good and bad buildings can have a huge effect on our quality of life and the quality of our public space. I welcome the inclusion of place making in the debate. As a Glasgow representative, I am in so many respects a privileged person—perhaps in no respect more than in relation to our built environment. Glasgow boasts great buildings and important spaces, but our built environment reflects change and dynamism as well as landmarks that should be preserved. I thought that Patricia Ferguson made an excellent speech about her experience of life in the Red Road flats and some of the changes in the city that we have seen over the years. It might be unpopular, but one of my favourite documents is the Bruce report—which was actually two papers—in which the corporation engineer Robert Bruce set out options for the long-term redesign of Glasgow city centre in the post-war years. The report and interesting drawings that are associated with it are well worth a look for a range of reasons. The plans to move railway stations and to open up new expressways and motorways are breathtaking, if not a little frightening, in their scale. Plans to demolish slum housing, combined with options for the demolition of George Square and the creation of new municipal buildings, speak equally of a vision for a brave new world as well as a desire to leave the past behind. Elements of those various schemes happened—the M8 being the most obvious example. In other areas, the report continued to influence planning through to the days of Strathclyde Regional Council. Many important Glasgow streets and tenements were cleared for new super-road arteries that were never built. Architecture and design are important and stimulating, not least because in the kind of pencil drawings that are in the Bruce report we can see glimpses of a future that never came, albeit that we might be thankful for that.

I point out to John Mason that Glasgow also has the world’s largest municipal art collection. There are choices to be made and balances to be struck. Of course we need investment in schools, but I am sure that, if the member looked at Glasgow City Council’s record in its school building programme, he would be impressed by what has been achieved—although, unfortunately, things have slowed since 2007. I certainly think that there is a place for iconic buildings. As a world city and home to thousands of people, Glasgow has, for better or worse, been influenced by the thinking of Sir Basil Spence as much as by the surviving works of George Gilbert Scott, Alexander Thomson or Charles Rennie Mackintosh, or by the outstanding Catholic churches and commercial buildings of my own favourite practice, Gillespie, Kidd and Coia, which Linda Fabiani has already mentioned. In Glasgow today, the key skills of building design and planning are taught in our colleges, universities and, of course, the Glasgow School of Art. Whether undertaken at a Park Circus architecture practice or as part of an apprenticeship with City Building helping to construct the Glasgow house, these careers provide worthwhile and rewarding work. Buildings do not exist in isolation any more than people do. They can either make or spoil spaces; in Glasgow, we have examples of both. Living in Glasgow’s unique west end, which is a mix of Victorian estates, pre-urbanisation industrial and residential buildings—particularly around the River Kelvin—the University of Glasgow’s postmodern concrete towers and many new buildings and older buildings that have been given a new lease of life, I am acutely aware of the importance of planning and good design to communities where the built environment is considered precious. However, good buildings should not be the preserve of only affluent communities. Investing in the skills that are required to make and maintain better buildings and places can benefit all Scotland. The new school and hospital building programme that was implemented in the years after 1997 has given us many fine new public buildings; however, it is probably the case that the quality of many of those buildings improved as capacity improved and more were built. Indeed, I visited one of those buildings—Hillhead primary school—just last week. Architecture and design should be seen as a Scottish success story and I hope—indeed, I am sure—that in having this debate the cabinet secretary is signalling her intention to invest in and celebrate our skills and innovation, as well as her determination to ensure that the Scottish Government gives even greater priority to the challenge of constructing sustainable buildings and places. Finally, I wish to associate myself with the remarks that were made by the cabinet secretary, Patricia Ferguson and others on VAT for building extensions. I was particularly impressed by Mike MacKenzie’s ability to connect the issue of constitutional change with VAT relief for conservatories. It was very cleverly done. I encourage members to support Patricia Ferguson.

I completely agree with Dennis Robertson’s point. However, he will be aware that, for a lot of workers, particularly those who are low paid, whether they get to work in winter determines whether they get paid. That is the case for contract workers, including those in the public services. Government agencies advise people that it is not safe to travel, but employers—including those who are contracted by public agencies—make clear to people that, if they do not get to their work, they will not be paid.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Given Margaret Burgess’s strong view that the Welfare Reform Bill has been awful from the start, was she surprised that the Scottish Government did not mention the legislative consent motion in its motion for the debate?

The debate has provided a welcome opportunity for us to begin discussing our attitude towards the UK Government’s Welfare Reform Bill, although it has taken the SNP some five months to bring the issue to Parliament and its motion makes no mention of the legislative consent motion that will allow the bill to affect devolved powers, budgets and services. Because of Labour’s amendment, the LCM is the key issue that the Parliament faces; from what I understand, it might have been the key issue at this afternoon’s SNP group meeting. When she opened for Labour, Jackie Baillie made it clear that Scottish Labour was supportive of many of the aims of welfare reform. It was interesting that Government front benchers said the same, whereas its back benchers seemed to have no desire for welfare reform at all. We saw merit in simplifying the system of support that is available to those who are not able to work and started to ensure that those who could work were supported to do so. Universal credit could have been an opportunity to improve the welfare state rather than to threaten it. In her intervention on Nicola Sturgeon at the beginning of the debate, Mary Scanlon pleaded with us not to judge the bill by what it says now. She felt that we were being premature. However, she offered no suggestion as to how the bill might be improved.

Sure.

That is the choice of the Scottish Government. I am happy to have taken Mary Scanlon’s intervention, as she has been so keen to get in for so long. I see that Liam McArthur is back. It is interesting that there has been only one Lib Dem in the chamber for the entire debate. I do not know whether that is an indication of the Liberals’ lack of interest in welfare reform or their support for the UK Government’s welfare reform proposals. We have heard very serious concerns about what the bill will do. Universal credit and the myriad reforms and cuts on which the whole agenda is predicated undermine many of the coalition’s stated objectives. As it is drafted, the bill will fail to incentivise many to work and will throw others into deep poverty and despair. Many members have addressed various elements of the reforms and highlighted a number of reasons why they are wrong-headed. I pay particular tribute to Margaret McCulloch, who spoke eloquently, to Mark McDonald, who made an excellent contribution—at least for the first half of it—and to Siobhan McMahon, who spoke passionately. Labour as a UK party has scrutinised and highlighted many of the same inconsistencies, anomalies and downright unfairnesses. Scotland has a higher proportion of claimants for every one of the benefits that will become the universal credit. The impact will be severe and long lasting and will result in a disproportionate hit on our economy. The reduction in spending power will devastate efforts to regrow the economy and will place demand on already overpressed and underfunded services such as housing and money advice. The Scottish Government has rightly acknowledged—in the debate but not in the wording of its motion—the impact that the changes will have on many devolved benefits, where UK benefits are used as passports to particular services. Many members have highlighted those services, and I am thinking in particular of clothing grants, free school meals, childcare and concessionary bus travel. The coalition is leaving too many of the most important details for secondary legislation, which is something that even I, a member of the Subordinate Legislation Committee, would agree results in inadequate scrutiny of major changes. We could not accept an LCM that did the same for the devolved aspects of the bill. I appreciate that the Scottish Government has been as frustrated by the coalition’s approach as Labour at Westminster has been but, as Jackie Baillie said, the SNP approach has been uncharacteristically quiet—quieter than we would expect on issues that are perhaps closer to its political interests. The finance secretary has set out his budget, and we are now engaged in scrutinising his proposals and assumptions. It would be foolhardy and short-sighted to continue to do that without much more debate and detail and much less denial about what is coming down the line on welfare reform. Bob Doris mentioned changes to housing benefit. Those changes will have a greater impact on Scottish housing policy in this generation than any manifesto commitment that we could have on house building or on homelessness, which both Nicola Sturgeon and Jackie Baillie were in unusual agreement about today. We are not attacking the SNP for a calamity that is being created by the coalition parties, but it has not listened enough to the welfare organisations, disability groups and anti-poverty campaigners who have been telling anyone who will listen that the Scottish Government is sleepwalking through the bill.

Sorry, I want to make a bit of progress. It is only as a result of Labour’s amendment that we have an opportunity to state a view on legislative consent. The final decision on an LCM will follow committee examination, but the Government must return to the chamber with more information and more ideas about what it intends to do to mitigate the impact on services for which it is already responsible. The SNP does not need a new constitution or a new country to do that. It is the SNP’s challenge to identify the opportunities in the devolution that is already inherent in the bill to ensure that moneys that are transferred to Scotland are not used to plug gaps in its own budget, as has happened before. We accept that the Scottish Government faces a tough challenge, but it is the self-same ability to rise to the challenges that we face for which my party fought the SNP in the election. Scottish Labour, with the convention partners, created this Parliament, and we argued in May that it could be used to protect people from unfair and unsound coalition policy. It was the SNP that won the election, and it must now face up to what is happening and propose its way forward. Jackie Baillie invited the Government to answer a number of specific questions in closing, which I hope Nicola Sturgeon takes the opportunity to do. If the SNP engages with welfare reform in a way that meets the fairness test, which the bill itself has clearly failed to do, it will have our support. However, if the SNP members duck it—if they simply blame London and sit on their hands—they deserve to be hit by the train that is already hurtling towards them. The bill will paralyse our Parliament on many issues on which we already have consensus. For devolved services, for local councils, for social landlords, for Scots who are unable to work, for those who want to work, for those who provide money advice services and for cancer patients who will lose their benefits before their treatment has even been given the chance to save their lives, the implications are stark and brutal. We have made our position clear, and I understand that the SNP in local government is putting pressure on the Government to agree with us, too. It is up to the SNP to decide whether it wishes to stop the Tory train or to get on board.

3. To ask the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body how its procurement processes safeguard the terms and conditions of its contract staff. (S4O-00236)

I am grateful to the corporate body for its answer and for its response to Kezia Dugdale on the living wage. I have heard that there are contract staff in the Parliament who are not paid sick pay. That is extremely concerning to me and I am sure that it concerns the corporate body. Does the corporate body know how widespread such problems are among contract staff? Are there plans to review how contracts are drawn up in future?

Perhaps one measure that might address some of the problem is the social responsibility levy. We would be able to take money back and use it for a positive purpose rather than simply giving extra money to big supermarkets’ shareholders. Is it not unfortunate that the Scottish Government has completely failed to bring forward proposals to do any such thing?

The motion that my colleague Mary Fee lodged encouraged Quarriers to go to the Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service, which is the national organisation that encourages conciliation and arbitration. What was unreasonable about that?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Two weeks ago, I attended a community event in Easterhouse that had been organised by my colleague, Margaret Curran MP, the shadow minister for welfare reform, at which I was asked what the attitude of the Scottish Government would be to the United Kingdom Government’s welfare reform proposals. Today’s general question number 4, which was lodged by Joan McAlpine, raised that matter. You will be aware that I contacted the business team to indicate that I wanted to be called to ask a supplementary question. However, the chamber will be aware that the question was mysteriously withdrawn today, although the member was in the chamber. I hope that that was not at the instigation of the Government and that you were provided with proper notice and explanation of why question 4 was not asked. For the benefit of new members and the Government, could you outline the circumstances in which it would be appropriate for a lodged question to be withdrawn by a member, bearing in mind that that affects the opportunities for others in this Parliament to further question the Government?

I am grateful to be called to speak in this historic debate, and I congratulate my Labour colleague, Hugh Henry, on securing it and on his excellent speech. As other members have already indicated, the work-in at Upper Clyde Shipbuilders was a seminal moment on Clydeside and for industrial relations around the world and the power of collective endeavour. It put the fight for fairness, dignity and the right to work in the spotlight for the whole world. As seminal moments go, it was a long one and was prompted by the UCS board telling the unions on 11 June 1971 of the cash crisis. It really started in the days that followed, with the first stewards’ meeting in the hall of the Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers and the larger meetings at Carlton Place and then at the Rosevale bingo. It took the men who were built in the yards of the Clyde to Downing Street to force a meeting with Edward Heath. It caused a general strike across the west of Scotland and brought an emergency session of the Scottish TUC to Partick burgh hall. It brought the TUC itself to Glasgow, elevated four wise men and secured the support of the then shadow secretary for trade and industry, Tony Benn. All of those things have become the stuff of legend, but none of them is the real reason why the UCS work-in was important. This anniversary is not important because Jimmy Reid and Jimmy Airlie became so iconic. It is not important because John and Yoko sent a cheque and red roses. The first pronouncement of the co-ordinating committee was clear: “We are going to fight ... Helping us is helping yourself ... Demand the right to work.” This anniversary is important not just because they fought but because they fought and won. On 9 October 1972 a deal was secured to save the fourth yard at Clydebank: “Not a yard will close - Not a man down the road.” The importance of this anniversary is not just about remembering the struggle, the sacrifice and the strength of workers united and determined in their objectives. The stewards of UCS warned that the end of shipbuilding on the upper Clyde would be unthinkable because it would recreate the conditions of the 1930s. Well, that fear is again abroad in Scotland. Speaking years after their work-in about why they had done what they had done, one of the men said: “If government cannot organise for decent work for all who can work, then what is the point of government at all?” That is the challenge for this Parliament and, if I may be political for a second or two, for the Scottish Government, too. The spirit of UCS and of the many workplace struggles that we have seen in our country since have informed our political debate in Scotland. More than that, they have influenced the very foundation of this Parliament. I believe that collectivism, solidarity and tenacity are our traits as a nation. If we wish to be remembered for what we did in this time, we must make them our hallmarks, too. The right to work is not just an economic necessity; it is, as UCS demonstrated, the right to dignity. The workers of UCS knew the social pain and consequences of mass unemployment in their communities and in their families. It is right that we are marking this anniversary in this place tonight. It has been remembered this year across Scotland, with various events that colleagues have mentioned. I congratulate the unions involved in the marking of the anniversary. I commend to you, Presiding Officer, my own recent motion on the continued flourishing of shipbuilding on the Clyde, which marked the departure of HMS Dragon, the latest of our Clyde-built Daring-class destroyers and the large hull section known as “Lower Block 3”, which will become part of the first Queen Elizabeth-class carrier. We are still building men and women on the Clyde, and thanks to the workers of UCS we are still building ships, too. The challenge for this Parliament and for the Government is clear: decent jobs, the right to work, dignity and hope.

As Marco Biagi has pointed out, the terms of reference of the higher education governance review refer to “an appropriate level of democratic accountability given the level of public funding” received. Will the review address the issue of lack of public audit in higher education, particularly given the difference between HE and FE in that respect? Will the cabinet secretary also confirm that there will be no further inflation in principals’ pay over the course of this parliamentary session?

I know that John Mason is aware of my motion on the fact that Partick Thistle’s ground is to become a police-free ground. How does he envisage the bill being enforced at such a ground?

I congratulate Elaine Smith, as others have done, on bringing this debate to the chamber. I will focus my remarks on the “better way” elements of the motion. I draw members’ attention to my past service on the general council of the STUC, which came to an end in April 2010. In my final few months serving on that body, attention was focused almost exclusively on the banking collapse, the bail-out and the potential consequences for ordinary working people in Scotland and for our public services. It was clear to us then that we were all threatened with a political backlash against public spending and an incoming Tory Government intent on using the global financial crisis as an excuse for ideological attacks on working people. We believed that, rather than learning the lessons of regulatory failure and seeking to correct market excess and corporate greed, the Tories would instead seek to further reduce regulation and tax at the top by punishing those in the middle and at the bottom. We knew that the deficit, which we considered to be manageable and necessary to sustain the economy and return us to growth, would be misrepresented and used as an excuse to attack investment in public services and public spending in general. Both of those fears have proved to be correct, which is why the STUC embarked on a campaign to educate workers and the public about the economic facts and the assault that we knew would come. The “there is a better way” campaign has been the biggest mobilisation of trade unions, civic Scotland and community activism since devolution. It has involved the voluntary sector, churches, local community groups and affiliates on local trade union councils and it has been extraordinarily successful. The campaign is explicitly not just an anti-cuts campaign. It pre-dates the Government’s cuts agenda and is not a response to the actions of others. It is a proactive articulation of the long-held view of the STUC and others that consensus around financial deregulation, diminishment of manufacturing and so-called labour flexibility in a market-knows-best economy was never going to be a sustainable route to a prosperous or equal society. The campaign highlights four priorities: living wages, fair taxation, public services and jobs. It was launched with a rally in this city last October and I was a steward on the march. I know that the Labour shadow secretary of state, Ann McKechin; my leader in this place, Iain Gray; and many members from the two main parties in the chamber were also present. As I said, that was the launch of a movement and the proclamation of an idea, not an end and not the culmination of a campaign. Since then, the STUC and its affiliates have been continuing to rebuild their campaigning capacity, with many better way conferences and training events taking place in workplaces and communities around Scotland. I pay particular tribute to the Public and Commercial Services union Scotland for its Wick wants work campaign. Two weeks ago, I joined my colleague Neil Findlay at a meeting of the West Lothian TUC to discuss its campaign and I commend it for what it has already achieved. A major mobilisation of Scottish workers also took place with the march for the alternative in London. Again, I was able to be present and the rally was addressed by the leader of my party, Ed Miliband. As an MSP I will continue to pursue the issues and causes that have brought me into this place. There is an alternative economic vision, which the Scottish Government and the UK Government should be listening to. In relation to the cuts that are being imposed, I hope that the minister will say something in closing about the different impacts that they will have in many communities and on many low-paid workers and vulnerable people. I know that Government back benchers were on the march last October. I hope that they will remember, in the five years ahead, why they were there. Hundreds of placards were produced bearing the slogan “fair taxes”. They were not brandished in support of slashing corporation tax. Indeed, a speaker from the Irish Congress of Trades Unions explicitly warned against the approach that is still being espoused by the Scottish National Party, despite the death of the Celtic tiger dream and the bending of their arc of prosperity. Focus on those issues will now be in the context of looming industrial action, which the Tory Government is provoking with its announcement of final positions in advance of negotiations with the unions. At the congress of my own union, the GMB, at which, but for my election to the Parliament, I would have been a delegate, Vince Cable threatened basic rights and freedoms, which are recognised internationally, for workers to organise and represent themselves collectively in defence of their interests and conditions, their industries and, in many cases, their public services. My party fought the election on a manifesto that contained many elements of both the better way priorities and the people’s charter, which Elaine Smith outlined earlier, and I look forward to pursuing my involvement and activism in these issues in this, our Scottish Parliament.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to reform governance structures in higher education institutions. (S4O-00017)

In light of the consultation on the cuts that are being made at the University of Strathclyde, which has lasted a month and is taking place during an exam period, will the cabinet secretary consider the call by University and College Union Scotland for a governance inquiry? I would be interested to know whether the cabinet secretary agrees with Noam Chomsky that Strathclyde’s plans are “very odd”, or with the First Minister, who said that Strathclyde is seizing opportunities and taking “a fantastic route”?

I congratulate Colin Keir and the other members who are speaking for the first time this afternoon. I welcome the cabinet secretary to her place and congratulate her on her appointment as minister for cities strategy. There has been some speculation in the press—particularly the Glasgow press—about why the cities strategy has found its way into the health portfolio. However, as Bob Doris said, health inequalities demonstrate an important link between health and the cities strategy, with the 100 GP practices that serve the most deprived areas being found predominantly in Glasgow, some parts of Edinburgh and Dundee. As Colin Keir said, Scotland’s cities are our nation’s economic powerhouse. Each is home to excellent universities whose teaching and research can drive Scotland forward. The cities are hubs for business and tourism and for social and cultural life. Here in Edinburgh and in Aberdeen, Dundee, Inverness, Stirling and my own city of Glasgow, our people are proud of our cities’ heritage and ambitious for their future. The previous Labour-led Government produced the cities review, which was the last major piece of work on cities. In a recent written answer to me, the cabinet secretary stressed her desire for the new cities strategy to “be developed collaboratively with the cities”,—[Official Report, Written Answers, 2 June 2011; S4W-193.] and I welcome that commitment. As the cabinet secretary said, the six cities vision is the starting point. That agreement, which the Scottish Council for Development and Industry brokered, shows that the cities have come together to focus on their shared economic ambitions and priorities and deliver long-term sustainable growth. Scotland’s cities—and particularly Gordon Matheson, Glasgow City Council’s leader—have pursued the cities agenda in recent times. It is therefore welcome that the Scottish Government is now listening to what our cities need to prosper and grow, especially in these times when city governments are taking tough decisions as a result of budgets that are not in their control. The cities want a focus on building infrastructure that can deliver economic impact; developing our cities as creative centres of productivity, knowledge and innovation; and putting cities at the heart of Scotland’s sustainability. The Government should recognise our cities’ economic contribution to Scotland and create trade and tourism plans that acknowledge our cities as the gateway to Scotland. The truth is that Scotland has lagged behind many other countries that have invested in their cities. Taking a strategic approach to their welfare and contribution is in the interests of all. Of Scotland’s population, 27 per cent live in our cities, but our cities produce 47 per cent of gross value added, which amounts to £44 billion; 43 per cent of business turnover; 40 per cent of jobs; and 36 per cent of research and development. The Centre for Cities report “Cities Outlook 2011” identified Scotland’s major cities as being better placed to avoid a double-dip recession than cities elsewhere in the UK. It argues that cities should be given more power and flexibility to respond to their problems and to identify their opportunities for growth. We need a new funding model to support long-term investment in Scotland’s cities that learns lessons from the cities growth fund and the derelict land fund. I know that Glasgow City Council places importance on that; Sandra White also mentioned the issue. Glasgow needs changes from the Government if it is to prosper. Despite huge investment in our roads—for example, Glasgow City Council has committed £12 million this year and more is to come—they are still not up to scratch. Government funding is based on lengths of road and not usage. Union Street in the city centre is an unclassified road that is not eligible for much support, but it is four lanes wide and carries 2,000 buses every day.

I agree absolutely with Margo MacDonald on that point. As Patricia Ferguson said, if Glasgow airport is to be a destination and not just an outbound airport, we need a replacement for the air route development fund. Other European Union cities can offer airlines practical support and, by not taking action, the Scottish Government is allowing Glasgow to be left behind. The leaders of Glasgow City Council and the City of Edinburgh Council have pushed for our cities’ inclusion in the UK’s high-speed rail network, which is crucial to ensuring that Scotland is not cut off from our British capital or the European and world markets to which the network would open us up. The business case for high-speed rail is weaker without Scotland’s inclusion and our existing rail links already lack capacity at a time when intercity rail demand is increasing. Within Glasgow, we need the Scottish Government to commit to the whole fastlink route to link the Southern general, the city centre and—vitally—the Commonwealth games site at Dalmarnock. On all those issues and more, a minister for Scotland’s cities must be an enabler and not a centralising force that seeks to take control. Since the election, some members of the Scottish Government have faced two ways on controversial restructuring of Glasgow’s universities and weighed into arguments about care provision in a manner that seems to single out Glasgow for party-political purpose. However, the cabinet secretary was quoted in The Herald as saying that she would not seek to interfere with council powers in Glasgow, and I take her at her word. Instead, we should focus on the areas in which strategic support and enabling of city governments can make a difference, such as those that I have highlighted today, and, in Glasgow’s case, tackling poverty and creating enough new jobs. Given that Glasgow asked for a stronger cities policy, it would not be acceptable if that were now used as a platform to attack particular administrations or to campaign for a change in political leadership. The debate on Glasgow’s future must be about more jobs for Glaswegians, not more councillors for the SNP. Collaborative engagement with Glasgow on the cities agenda is in the interests of our whole country. I look forward to further debate in the weeks and months ahead.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. I am honoured to make my maiden speech in this our Scottish Parliament, as a member for Glasgow region. As with others on these benches, my feelings on being elected to this place were tempered by sadness at the loss of some good representatives from the city of Glasgow. As I was most closely involved with the campaign in Glasgow Kelvin, I hope that members and other Glasgow candidates who are not with us will forgive me if I take a moment to say a particular word about Pauline McNeill. Committed to Scottish home rule, not only was she a champion of my city, its people and its causes, but she had other international interests, particularly the cause of the Palestinian people. She is a loss to my party and to this Parliament. Like other colleagues, I want to congratulate the SNP on winning the election so decisively and welcome Shona Robison to her place as minister. She might not recall, but in a previous life working in health promotion I had much pleasure in arranging for her a health walk with a Paths for All volunteer scheme in Fife. In her tenure as Minister for Public Health and Sport, she showed real commitment to health-enhancing physical activity, and I hope that in her new role she will continue to promote a more physically active Scotland as well as a successful sporting Scotland. I also hope that the minister agrees that protecting the number of active sport co-ordinators in local communities and ensuring that it does not decline is key to encouraging Scots to become more rather than less physically active, and that she will give priority to the issue of expedited disclosures for coaches and others and, indeed, the question whether in some cases such disclosures are needed at all. For example, it cannot be right that some volunteer leaders are having their criminal records checked simply to lead a health walk. The role of the Scottish Government, local councils, health boards and other organisations in this field should be to open up pathways to sport activity and better health, not to block them. When I was young I swam competitively, and like Richard Simpson and Patricia Ferguson I ask the minister to consider the role that free swimming lessons for all primary-age children can play. I am not talking just about access to council pools for those who are already using them or about bringing in swimming lessons at some arbitrary age, such as seven. Sport and physical activity should be part of growing up for all our children, and maintaining healthy activity levels should be part of life for all grown-ups. Glasgow is a city that loves sport. I know that because I live in the shadow of one of the world’s great football teams: Partick Thistle Football Club. Given that football is our national game, I ask the minister to provide real and proactive assistance to supporters who wish to play a role in governing or owning their clubs. In that respect, I highlight Bill Butler’s work with the supporters trust on this issue in the last session. Be it in international competitions or in local youth clubs, sport has the potential to make us better people. In sport, we learn the rules of fairness, strive for individual success and often learn how to be part of a team. From climbing walls and outdoor sports to swimming at Tollcross and bowling at Kelvingrove, Glasgow is one of the world’s great sporting cities. That is why the Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth games are so important both to the city and to Scotland. In my first speech in this chamber and on this subject, I pay tribute to Glasgow City Council, the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland and everyone, including the Scottish Government, who was involved in winning the games for Glasgow and getting us to where we are. The Glasgow games, which are on time and within budget, are on schedule to be the great success that Glasgow needs them to be. They are vital for the regeneration of the east end. As Richard Simpson highlighted, they are the first major international sporting competition to put a health promotion legacy at the heart of their planning. If that health legacy is to be meaningful, it is essential that the minister publishes baselines from which we can measure the success or otherwise of that ambition. Glasgow 2014 has massive potential, not only to transform the city’s infrastructure but to improve Glaswegians’ life chances. Many young people will benefit from Glasgow City Council’s Commonwealth apprentices programme, which builds further on the excellent work that we are already doing in Glasgow. Glasgow City Council has put Labours’ politics into policy, given opportunities to our young people and ensured that the fight against youth unemployment is at the front and centre of everything that my party does. As a former chair of the Scottish Trades Union Congress young workers committee and a past member of the STUC general council, those issues matter to me, and I will make youth employment, decent jobs for all and fairness in the workplace my priorities in the Parliament. In the period since the election, there has been speculation in the media about who is running Glasgow 2014: Glasgow City Council or the Scottish Government. I say gently to the Scottish Government that putting next year’s local elections in Glasgow ahead of the success of the games would be very bad sportsmanship. Supporting the organising committee and all the partners to deliver the best games yet, delivering for Glasgow’s east end, improving Glasgow’s health and increasing levels of physical activity are my goals for the 20th Commonwealth games, and I hope that the minister shares them. Presiding Officer, I support the amendment in Richard Simpson’s name, and I am grateful for the time that you have given me. I look forward to the challenges ahead of me as a new member. I will put the interests of the people of Glasgow first in the Scottish Parliament, and I will strive to do my best for the people I am proud and humble to represent.