2. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Justice last met the chief constable and what was discussed. (S4O-02888)

Will the cabinet secretary play a part in deciding Police Scotland’s corporate business strategy and its financial savings plan for 2013 to 2016 during March, or will he continue his hands-off approach to the chief constable’s demolition of Police Scotland?

The Commonwealth games will begin with an event in my Motherwell and Wishaw constituency on 24 July. Before Glasgow takes over the baton, Strathclyde park will get its place in the spotlight as millions watch the triathlon, which is surely one of the most demanding events as it involves a combination of three very different and difficult sports. It starts with a 1.5km swim, followed by a 40km cycle race, and the final section is a 10km run. It is a true test of stamina and therefore a very fitting event with which to kick off the Commonwealth games. Also on 26 July, for the first time at the Commonwealth games, there will be a mixed relay event, with teams of two men and two women undertaking individual sprint triathlons in succession. In addition, North Lanarkshire Council will host the men’s and women’s cycling time trial on Thursday 31 July, which will take place in the northern corridor around Stepps, Muirhead, Chryston and Auchinloch. My best wishes go to all our Scottish athletes, all the visiting athletes and to everyone who will be volunteering and supporting the games. As the triathlon is the first event “And it’s in the constituency too”, to use the words of Alan Jackson’s poem on the wall outside the Parliament, I am sure that it will be watched by many millions across the Commonwealth and throughout the world. The 2014 Commonwealth games will give us opportunities. The events that will take place in North Lanarkshire will be a great opportunity to boost the local economy during the games and will provide a superb opportunity to showcase Motherwell and Wishaw, and North Lanarkshire and to say to the world: “Here we are—a good place to visit, a good place to stay and a good place to do business.” It is also an opportunity to display Scotland at its best on the international stage if we can just agree not to use it as a stage for internal politics. There is the potential to reap social and health benefits from the games as well as economic ones. We now have stagnation and decline in sporting participation rates, but the games can and should provide a focus to reboot the improvement that we achieved in that regard in the early years of the Scottish Parliament. Sport can be a catalyst for health improvement and social change, which is particularly important in areas of high deprivation, where sporting participation is often stubbornly low. To tap and capture for the future the enthusiasm and passion, and the full potential and success of the games, the Scottish Government—current and future—will need to deliver and guarantee concerted effort to extend sporting involvement at all levels. The opportunities that are presented by the games have clearly been recognised by North Lanarkshire Council, which so far has invested £2.2 million across various locations, with additional confirmed funding from the Scottish Government of over £600,000. I understand that a further £103,000 of funding is under consideration. I hope that the minister will be able to confirm as soon as possible—perhaps even today—that that additional support is being made available. North Lanarkshire is also organising a variety of activities, including cultural and sporting events. It is helping with additional volunteers and publicity and branding, getting business involved and—not least—working to maximise the legacy of the games. That legacy ranges from the global exposure that the games will bring and the experience that is gained from staging the event, to more tangible legacies, such as an improved road and footpath network, improved cabling infrastructure in Strathclyde park and the potential to re-use the barrier system in the loch there to ensure water quality in the future. There will be television viewers around the world, and North Lanarkshire Council will also play mine host to many thousands of visitors from across the Commonwealth nations. I know that they will get a warm welcome from local people, which will, I hope, be matched by the weather. Like my constituents, I am looking forward to the games. I suspect that we will find it difficult not to imagine that the sun will be shining. While John Mason and James Dornan might dispute who has the biggest football park, what cannot be disputed is that the first medal of the games will be awarded at Strathclyde park.

The LCM’s proposals on forced marriage proved very contentious. The shortcomings of the process were such that the committee decided not to recommend support for that part of the LCM. Shakti, Hemat Gryffe and Scottish Women’s Aid expressed doubts about whether criminalisation would have any significant impact on either awareness or the strength of the message that forced marriage was not acceptable. They also questioned whether there was any need for such a legislative change on the ground that it could be counterproductive to create a criminal offence that deters reporting in a way that the current civil provision for forced marriage protection orders does not. Victims could be put off seeking protection orders and annulments because of their reluctance to see their families criminalised. Indeed, that was the conclusion that was reached when the matter was considered previously. However, despite such reservations, a strong case was made to support the LCM on the grounds of international obligations and consistency of approach with the rest of the UK. On consistency, I have to say that opinion on sentencing was divided. Originally, a maximum sentence of two years was specified, which is in line with sentences for similar offences under Scots law. However, in December, the minister revised that to seven years, to match sentencing in England and Wales. One problem that we had was the lack of evidence. The minister and Scottish Government officials acknowledged the clear need for more research and said that they would undertake research on the effectiveness of criminalisation. Unfortunately, the fact that that will be done retrospectively leaves them open to suspicions that it will be used to justify their actions. What will ministers do to guarantee the independence of such research? The availability of both civil and criminal remedies creates other complications. Victims who have instigated civil proceedings might find that they are suspended if criminal charges are brought. The Scottish Government needs to address the interaction of civil and criminal proceedings and to ensure that the best interests of victims are central to such considerations. Such shortcomings highlight the folly of bringing forward legislation in this area without proper consultation. It would have been better for the Scottish Government to instigate research and consultation earlier, instead of being dragged along on the shirt tails of UK legislation, and to develop and introduce properly researched Scottish legislation after full consultation. However, that did not happen and now the LCM, despite its lack of credibility, seems to be the only option on offer if we are to meet our international obligations. Given the importance of those obligations, I will support the motion, but for the reasons that I have outlined I will do so with reluctance.

The report notes that, at Wishaw hospital, the most common reason for breach of the four-hour standard was the wait for first assessment. However, constituents have told me that people sometimes give up and go away before they are assessed. What account does the report take of that?

People can find court proceedings stressful at the best of times without having to recount in intensive detail not only the crimes that they may have been the victim of or a witness to but other information about their lives past and present, which is sometimes of questionable relevance as evidence. Of course, the courts need to establish the truth, and not all witnesses and victims tell the whole truth and nothing but the truth. However, for the many who do, questioning can seem like an unwarranted intrusion on their private lives and an unjustified attack on their character. Yet, while defendants have lawyers to advise them and give them significant support and the prosecution has extensive resources at its disposal, victims and witnesses are too often left out in the cold. Limited advice and support is available to them, but they lack someone to speak up specifically and solely for their interests in the court proceedings. As amendments 1 and 2, in the name of Elaine Murray, highlighted, we ought to ensure that our legislation is sensitive to the needs, rights and wishes of child victims and witnesses. The welfare of the child should be paramount in setting standards of service for child victims and witnesses. There should be guidance on the circumstances in which sensitive personal information of victims of sexual offences can be disclosed in court, and legal advice should be made available to victims in such circumstances. Victims and witnesses should be consulted before regulations that may affect them are changed. Victims should be able to choose how they are told about the prisoner’s eligibility for release and the outcome, and they should get support to help them to cope with the news rather than having to experience the shock that can result from a letter landing on the doormat. We should give victims and witnesses the chance, if they wish, to speak directly to the offender via videolink ahead of release, at least in cases of life imprisonment. We on the Labour side of the chamber welcome the bill, but we regret that it has become a missed opportunity. Even though the cabinet secretary has accepted one of Labour’s amendments today, the bill could have been so much better if he, and his colleagues on the committee at stage 2, had been more willing to accept suggestions from other parties, which were often based on the wishes and suggested improvements that were expressed by victims and organisations representing children and young people. That said, after six and a half years we finally have legislation on the issue from the Government that, while not as ambitious as it could have been, is still an improvement. On that basis, despite my reservations, I will support the bill.

Here we are again: another year on and another step backwards. Since 2008, the Scottish Government has dumped the biggest burden of cuts on local government and has at the same time increased demands. Services are suffering and charges are increasing. That double whammy is most severely felt by the most vulnerable people—should it therefore be a triple whammy?—because they are also the people who get least benefit from the underfunded council tax freeze.

As the recent Joseph Rowntree Foundation report points out—

—it is areas of high deprivation that suffer—

Motherwell and Wishaw suffer from high social deprivation. Can the cabinet secretary—[Interruption.]

Can the cabinet secretary and his Government tell me when they are going to address that?

Jayne Baxter mentioned in her closing speech that Labour agreed with the principles of the bill but that there could be resourcing issues. The SNP’s white paper says that childcare for 50 per cent of two-year-olds would cost nearly £100 million. Considering today’s autumn statement when nearly £300 million is coming in consequentials, does the minister agree that £100 million from the consequentials—

Methadone maintenance treatment is not a solution to drug addiction; it replaces one form of addiction with another. However, it can enable an addict to stabilise their addiction and begin to rebuild their life. As well as making their addiction more manageable, methadone treatment is safer than taking drugs of unknown origin and strength, which may also involve sharing syringes and needles, with the risk of contracting hepatitis and HIV. Methadone treatment is sometimes criticised by the media or by members of the public who think that more should be done to cure addiction through abstinence. I understand that that alternative is used in some countries, including Russia—Willie Rennie mentioned that—but for many users, withdrawal is easier said than done. There may be adverse physiological and psychological consequences; that is the nature of addiction. For that reason, opiate replacement therapies have long been essential harm-reduction measures; that role was endorsed five years ago by the road to recovery strategy. However, despite the apparent consensus, the evidence is not clear-cut. The expert review recognises that there are issues with the evidence that is available and quotes the 2012 UK drug policy commission: “Drug policy is currently a mix of cautious politics and limited evidence and analysis. This is coupled with strident and contested interpretations, both of the causes of problems and the effects of policies. In fact, for as long as there has been a drug policy, there have been gaps in the evidence as well as uncertainty about how to understand and act on the evidence that we do have.” In that context, I am pleased that the review not only dealt with the many people who are involved in delivering and receiving a variety of treatments, but accorded their views and experiences equal status with those of local and national bodies. If we are to develop an effective person-centred approach to opioid addiction, it is essential that such evidence is a significant part of our consideration of what will be the best way forward. One aspect that has been made clear by such stakeholder input is that some alcohol and drug partnerships perform poorly when it comes to recovery. The report notes: “There was little evidence presented by some ADPs regarding a real impetus towards recovery. Stakeholder reports supported this view.” The review highlights that basic information was not often accessible, and that “Clear strategic plans and objective reports of improvement were rare ... Elements of recovery orientated services were often absent.” It also stated that “There was not a strong sense of accountability ... systems are destined to continue repeating mistakes or failing to capitalise on successes.” Those views add up to quite a damning indictment. Addicts who are motivated to stop are unlikely to succeed without the right help and support—not only for the initial period of withdrawal, but for the longer term. However, that help must address the circumstances that contribute to drug addiction and the relationship between drug taking and criminal behaviour. I welcome the review’s consideration of those issues and its findings, which seek a more consistent approach that focuses on recovery as a primary aim. The review recommends that a full range of care services be available in every area, including community rehabilitation services such as detoxification, residential rehabilitation, and services that deal with employability and housing. It also recommends development of better ways to link action on health inequalities with action to address problem substance misuse. One key measure would be to ensure that local inequalities strategies refer to plans to address the risks that are associated with substance misuse. Drug treatment and testing orders have an important role to play in respect of drug-related crime. We need to use them better, as part of a joined-up system that supports addicts to overcome their addiction. The debate has focused on opioids, but we should bear it in mind that many addicts have multiple addictions. Systems need to take account of patterns of drug use that encompass combinations of alcohol, opiates and other substances. I note the recommendations on pharmacy services; the role of pharmacies has evolved and has become important, so given how that role has changed, we need to examine its operation in order to ensure that it is working to best effect, as part of the overall strategy. I support the recommendation that there should be a national specification to ensure consistent high-quality care across the country, and that the system that is used to reimburse pharmacists for dispensing methadone should be reviewed.

We have heard how many deaths result from substance misuse, but any such death is one death too many. We need to ensure that we have a system that provides appropriate treatment options for everyone who wants to escape the dangers of addiction.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what recent action it has taken to encourage economic development in Motherwell and Wishaw. (S4O-02626)

More than 20 years on, Europe’s largest brownfield site at Ravenscraig is making welcome, but slow, progress. A college, a sports facility and some housing have been developed, but huge untapped potential remains. What measures are being put in place to support the proposed national priority status for Ravenscraig in order to accelerate development and encourage potential investors when the third national planning framework is published?

Sometimes it takes weeks to hear repetition in the chamber, but when it does we tend to think, “Oh, no! Not that again.” However, we are less than an hour into this debate and members should believe me when I say that they will hear much the same from me as they did from others, so I ask them to enjoy themselves and try to keep awake. There is, so far, broad consensus on the bill, its principles and most of its proposed measures. That consensus not only applies in the Parliament; it applies among many who submitted their views and gave evidence. There were criticisms, but those had a sympathetic reception from the committee, which is keen to see them addressed as the bill progresses. The advantages of reform of tribunals were acknowledged—those include greater economies of scale and sharing of good practice and resources—but there was also a strong desire to retain the special support and knowledge that are embodied in the current arrangements. Basically, we do not want to throw out the baby with the bath water. We want to keep the lay involvement, the less adversarial approach and the simpler and relatively informal user-centred nature of existing tribunals. I hope that those principles will be made explicit in the bill, with the fundamental characteristics of tribunals set out in it. It was also felt to be important that the bill be drafted in such a way that reserved tribunals could be brought into the structure at a later date. The Law Society of Scotland welcomes the bill, but has expressed concern about judicialisation of tribunals eroding their character. I agree that there is a danger that judicial members who would be appointed under the legislation would not understand the informality or the centrality of the user in the tribunal process. The committee has asked the Scottish Government to consider what additional safeguards can be included to avoid that. In particular, there must be a direction in the bill that the president’s discretion on appointments should be used to ensure that judicial members have the necessary expertise and understanding of the tribunal and its context. Although many submissions suggested ways to improve the bill to protect the characters of the tribunals, some people were not convinced that that is possible. The Lands Tribunal for Scotland questioned the efficiency of the approach, and whether it would be able to adapt—without creating significant problems—to the one-size-fits-all structure. It put its case strongly, and the committee was persuaded to urge the Scottish Government to think again about its inclusion. The valuation appeals committee was also concerned about the impact of imposing age limits, which would see over half of its membership lost. The Mental Health Tribunal also has unique characteristics, and there is support for its being retained in a chamber of its own. However, the worry is that that would be a temporary measure by the Scottish Government, so there must be long-term commitment to that arrangement for that tribunal. The other big area in which reassurances are sought is the children’s hearing system. It has already been subjected to reform, which adds to the need for care when we are considering further change. It is important that regulations in respect of the children’s hearings system be laid under the affirmative procedure in order to ensure that there is adequate consultation and parliamentary consideration of proposals. There are also various concerns about costs. Although we recognise that there is the potential to save money through elimination of duplication and adoption of common administrative and other resources, there will be costs involved in the transition. Long-term savings are one thing, but we should not risk being unsuccessful by trying to make the transition on the cheap. Fees and charges are also important, as recent controversy over fees for the reserved employment tribunals has highlighted. Some devolved tribunals also have charges and fees. Therefore, provision for them has been included in the bill, but it is important to ensure that that does not open the door to new charges being imposed where none previously existed, and that it does not become a platform for significant increases in existing charges. The committee proposes that any such charges be subject to consultation of users and stakeholders. Another issue that needs to be addressed is the enforceability of tribunals’ awards. More than 50 per cent of awards are not paid, or are not paid in full. As part of our discussions, we should consider how to address that. Although I was not a member of the Justice Committee at the time, I spoke in the debate on the matter last year. I said that I was in favour of reducing overlap and eliminating duplication as long as the overlap and duplication are genuine and their elimination does not involve putting square pegs into round holes. We have had the consultation and the committee has considered the bill. My view is that such a reduction is the intention of the bill, but work remains to be done to ensure that it achieves that in practice. I am content to support the bill at stage 1, but with my fellow committee members, I will look for significant improvements to be introduced at stage 2.

It concerns me that Police Scotland finds itself between a rock and a hard place and is forced to look at unpopular, unhelpful and unwanted cuts thanks to a cabinet secretary who has carved police numbers in tablets of stone while making massive budget cuts that threaten the character of Scottish policing. It is not surprising that the cabinet secretary has not taken responsibility for the consequences of his actions, because we all know that when the going gets tough he passes the buck and hides behind the facade of operational matters. Hundreds of staff posts have been axed, and now police accessibility is under attack. The public—our constituents—are being pushed towards using centralised call centres, instead of being able to visit a local station. That is Kenny MacAskill’s doing, and it is only the beginning, given that £140 million will be cut over the next two years—and that is the Scottish Government’s doing. The programme of station cuts affects how Scotland is policed. Most people would not call that an operational matter. In my area, the public are very concerned about Wishaw police station, but my call for a public meeting was rejected. Last year, 1,000 people and local businesses said clearly that they wanted a 24/7 police station in Wishaw, and this year they have been joined by hundreds more. Wishaw is a large town, not a small village, and it merits a full-time police station. This is not just about people’s ability to visit a police station when they need to do so. It is about an important element in the community: a station and a police presence. Downgrading station hours downgrades police availability, and cutting corners by closing stations undermines front-line public contact. Stephen House said—and I have never heard the cabinet secretary disagree—that a single force would bring stronger community connections, create more equal access and improve local policing. How can that be consistent with cutting and closing police stations and thereby restricting community contact and access? The proposed changes will create confusion about how to contact local police. Many people will not travel or indeed be able to travel to remote offices, and many will not use call centres. The 101 number is no substitute for local police stations, as the cabinet secretary knows. If the changes are desirable, why were they not proposed prior to the cuts?

No. The cabinet secretary’s mantra that almost everything is an operational matter has created a policy vacuum, which Police Scotland fills by default. He leaves the police to make policy decisions, with inadequate consultation, on matters such as Taser use and slashing stations. The main exceptions to that are his insistence on Police Scotland maintaining officer numbers, whatever the cost to police effectiveness, and his recent comment that he will prevent former supermarket managers with less than 10 years’ police service from getting promotion. How such minimal involvement enables the cabinet secretary to claim credit for falling crime rates is a mystery worthy of investigation by Rebus. Meanwhile, major policy decisions are left to unelected officials, leaving the Parliament to ask when the Scottish Government will take back ownership of Scotland’s policing policy.

As Christine Grahame said, repetition could well be the norm for much of the debate. As we have heard, the world has changed a great deal in the 40 years since the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 was written. The basic objectives of the act—to provide a balance between, on one hand, public protection and, on the other, rehabilitation and reducing reoffending—remain desirable, but social and legal changes have rendered the act less effective and have possibly made it counterproductive. For example, employers are now much more likely to inquire about criminal records. In addition, the fact that we have longer sentences means that there are more sentences of longer than 30 months that are never spent. There are several areas in which change could be made to create a more focused rehabilitation regime in prisons, with better education, work and training, and drug rehabilitation; more measured and effective treatment of ex-offenders that will benefit them and the general public through reduced offending; and a more consistent approach throughout the process of rehabilitation. Contentious though it might be, I welcome the consultation that is taking place, which I hope will help us to address those matters. It is estimated that at least a third of all adult males have a conviction and that nearly one in 10 women has a criminal record. There has been an increase in the number of professions and situations that are exempt from the provisions of the 1974 act. Given that 1 million applications for basic disclosure checks are made every year in Scotland, having a criminal record of any sort is clearly a major issue that could affect a person’s chances of securing employment. Although disclosure is an essential safeguard that was introduced to protect vulnerable groups against certain categories of offenders, it facilitates discrimination against offenders in other categories. As a study by the Scottish centre for crime and justice research at the University of Glasgow highlights, surveys of employers and ex-offenders show that there is frequent bias against those with criminal records, which impedes their rehabilitation and reintegration into society and the jobs market. Having a criminal record also affects someone’s access to education and training, volunteering and financial arrangements such as bank accounts and insurance. Significantly, exclusion from such things can increase the likelihood of reoffending Studies suggest that the risk of recidivism decreases greatly within the rehabilitation periods of the 1974 act and that there is a strong correlation between employment and reduced reoffending. That makes sense, because employment provides financial and social stability. It also turns on its head the argument about public protection versus rehabilitation, because in many cases rehabilitation through employment is the best way to ensure public protection from reoffending. Some employers know that and those who have hired ex-offenders are often enthusiastic about doing so in the future, but they are not the norm. What do we do about that? Other countries have a variety of arrangements. The consultation document summarises them, using the summary from the SCCJR paper. However, I note that it leaves out the paper’s health warning that it describes only the stated laws and policies and not how things work in practice. What we see abroad is that rehabilitation periods, where they exist, range from six months to 20 years, according to age, sentence type and sentence length. Unlike the UK, most countries do not restrict the offences that are eligible for rehabilitation by sentence length, and some completely destroy the criminal record once it is spent. The SCCJR study suggests three options: modification of the rehabilitation periods; providing a certificate of rehabilitation; and making exclusion specific to certain jobs. Changing rehabilitation periods would help, but it is a broad-brush approach and therefore something of a compromise. The certificate is an interesting idea that I believe should be explored further. It could be tied into more productive rehabilitation activity in prison, where at the moment there is little distinction between time spent playing football and time spent attending education classes. That is perhaps why the former is 10 times more popular than the latter. The third suggestion has much to recommend it, although it would require a much more sophisticated scheme of administration, because whole professions are excluded from the 1974 act. There could be much more differentiation of offences. Offenders who undertake community service with vulnerable groups can be subsequently excluded from any employment involving those groups. Surely there is scope for better assessment of risk. The Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 came from a private member’s bill that was heavily criticised and extensively amended, which made it complicated and sometimes difficult to interpret. Its simplification therefore seems an attractive alternative, but better still would be well-thought-out legislation that addresses the complexity of the issues that need to be tackled. We need a clear framework for the rehabilitation of offenders, but it needs to be flexible enough to be applied appropriately to a wide variety of circumstances.

Before the member widens the fairway, perhaps I can add to what Mr Findlay said. I, too, have had the pleasure of playing with a blind golfer. When he teed off, he asked, “John, how far have I hit that?” I said, “How far do you want it to be?”

I am a member of the Justice Committee, so I will consider corroboration over the coming weeks. As we heard, the battle lines for and against the current arrangements have been drawn. I do not want to pre-empt the evidence that people will give to the committee. I appreciate that there are compelling arguments on both sides. In many ways corroboration has served us well. It is a deep-seated part of our legal tradition, which helps to avoid false convictions. Miscarriages of justice are few and far between. The counter-argument is that the guilty might escape prosecution. Corroboration is frequently an obstacle to conviction for rape and attempted rape. Strong evidence can be rendered unusable. It is significant that we are unique among the developed countries in requiring corroboration. Supporters of corroboration argue that Scotland has a higher conviction rate than England has in cases of rape and attempted rape. However, statistics are rarely as straightforward as the people who use them would have us believe. The conviction rate tells us how many prosecutions were successful; it does not tell us how many reported cases were not prosecuted, and we can only guess how many cases were not reported and whether lack of corroboration was a factor in that. Corroboration will remain an intrinsic part of our legal system and should not be abandoned where it is readily available. For example, post-mortem pathology and related forensic examinations should continue to be the subject of two-person reports. Corroboration is at the heart of the checks and balances that seek, on the one hand, to minimise the number of false convictions and to ensure, on the other hand, that the guilty do not escape justice. Any decision to reduce the need for corroboration would also have to ensure that safeguards were put in place to maintain and strengthen those checks and balances. The checks and balances include the verdicts that can be returned and the number of jurors needed to deliver a verdict. The SNP says that requiring a verdict from 10 jurors rather than eight out of the 15 will be an adequate safeguard, but other countries where there is no corroboration require more than two thirds of the jury to return a majority verdict. Some even require unanimity. We would also be changing the basis of our legal system without considering the not proven verdict. Is corroboration an integral and essential part of our centuries-old law? If it is and it is not broke, why fix it? Or is corroboration a barrier to prosecution and merely an archaic aspect of our legal system? Maybes aye, maybes no. Maybe we should listen to the evidence, look at what safeguards are on offer and carefully consider their adequacy. If we abandon corroboration because it is the right thing to do, we must also consider the implications for the police and courts, which are faced with shrinking budgets and expanding workloads. A lot of questions still need to be answered, so let us not make up our minds before we have heard all the evidence and considered the issues properly.

Can the cabinet secretary guarantee that, when proposals come forward, consultation will take place? Will previous consultations be borne in mind? Will local people be given the opportunity to voice their concerns at public meetings?

4. To ask the Scottish Government when ministers last met NHS Lanarkshire to discuss hospital standardised mortality rates. (S4O-02345)

I thank the minister for that response, but when we look at the mortality rates, there is a marked inconsistency of approach. On the one hand, Wishaw is now being investigated after the figure was 10 per cent higher than expected last quarter, although it was average or below average for the previous three quarters; on the other hand, Monklands’ figure was high throughout the year—it went from 9 per cent to more than 38 per cent, with 80 unexpected deaths—without any investigation until now. Why did it take so long for the alarm bells to ring at Monklands? Should the minister now be considering an independent inquiry into NHS Lanarkshire as a whole?

When I spoke in the stage 1 debate on the bill, I was supportive of its general principles but not without some reservations. In many ways, little has changed: I am still supportive but seek assurances. I welcome the vote for 16 and 17-year-olds and the measures to protect personal data. However, I still believe that 16 and 17-year-olds should be able to vote in all elections, not just the referendum. There are many Scottish people living outside Scotland who, I am sure, would like to vote in the referendum but would not normally vote in elections here. I recognise that such Scots enjoy the benefits of being part of the United Kingdom as well as maintaining their Scottish identity, so it is likely that they would bolster support for the UK. However, I also understand the difficulties that including them would present in establishing the legitimacy of the referendum. Therefore, for the sake of a clear result, the best response to their dissatisfaction will be a resounding rejection of separatism and the disruption that it would bring to those who have strong ties with the other nations of the UK and who recognise the interdependence that binds them. As a constituency MSP with a busy main street office, I am quickly made aware of differences in opinions and the real issues that affect constituents’ lives. I have to say that no constituent has expressed any opinion on prisoners voting. Regardless of whether they have been prisoners, they are more concerned about the bread and butter issues, such as housing, education, jobs and putting food on the table. I suspect that most constituents support the exclusion of prisoners. Allowing prisoners to vote is not a major issue in my constituency, and I doubt that it would even be an issue for many prisoners. I am prepared to accept the Scottish Government’s proposal to exclude prisoners from voting as long as it does not affect the legitimacy of the referendum. However, like James Kelly and Patricia Ferguson, I feel that, given the importance of the legal issue and our commitment as a Parliament and nation to complying with the ECHR, ministers need to tell us the legal basis that supports their view that the bill is ECHR compliant. Ideally, in her closing speech, the cabinet secretary will remove all doubt and promise to make that available.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking regarding the free-to-air broadcasting of major events. (S4O-02276)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that answer but, given her recent euphoric announcement that in the land of milk and honey all Scotland football matches would be on free-to-air television, has she considered the cost, contacted the national football authorities and UEFA, and sought legal advice regarding existing contracts and European Union directives? Or is this another case of ministers making assertions rather than seeking assurances?

As the minister is well aware, I have welcomed the inclusion of Ravenscraig as a national priority in NPF3. I hope that its redevelopment is not only consolidated in NPF3 but boosted significantly as a consequence of its enhanced status, through the extension of Scottish Government support and by attracting increased investment from the private sector. When I think back to the works that once lit up the night sky, I think that it is worth noting that Ravenscraig has the potential to be a shining beacon again, but this time as an exemplary new community where sustainable development has been built in as part of the design process, with a town centre that is integrated with workplaces, homes, schools, shopping, leisure and community facilities, parks and wildlife areas that are all linked by state-of-the-art environmentally friendly public transport. Given the low-carbon, sustainable and connected objectives that the national planning framework seeks to pursue, it is appropriate that Ravenscraig should be a prominent part of NPF3. The minister will be aware of my concern that the Scottish planning policy needs to make it clear that planning authorities should be prepared and able to abandon excessively strict adherence to planning by numbers in balancing the competing needs of communities. That is not to say that there should be a free-for-all that ignores carefully considered planning objectives; rather, we should not allow the resulting rules to become fixed in tablets of stone that get in the way of pursuing the objectives. I welcome the general thrust of NPF3 and the SPP, but I have concerns about the interpretation of the vision that is being presented and the mechanisms and resources that will be available to support it. Significant concern has been raised in several of the briefings that we have received—and is likely to be repeated in submissions to the consultation—about whether a change in language reflects a change in policy. Does referring to sustainable economic growth, which is a poorly defined concept compared with the legally defined term “sustainable development”, mean that economic considerations will be given greater weight than the social and environmental consequences of development? That is the fear. The Local Government in Scotland Act 2003 requires local authorities to discharge their duty to seek best value “in a way which contributes to the achievement of sustainable development.” The statutory guidance for the act defines sustainable development as “development which secures a balance of social, economic, and environmental well-being in the impact of activities and decisions; and which seeks to meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” Of course, that definition builds on the one given in the Brundtland commission report “Our Common Future”. How are we to interpret the emphasis on sustainable economic growth in comparison with those definitions?

I will do so in a wee minute. The worry is that, by emphasising the need for maintaining economic growth, we are discounting or undervaluing resources that do not contribute directly to the economic growth statistics. Will we take proper account of social and environmental aspects of development? Will we ensure the protection and growth of our natural, human and social capital, in addition to the financial variety? Those questions could be settled easily in the debate were the Scottish Government to clarify its interpretation of sustainable economic growth and were it to promise to reaffirm its commitment to sustainable development when the final documents are published.

That is why I allowed the minister to intervene.

Of course, making commitments to low-carbon places and economies is one thing, but backing up those commitments with action is another. It remains to be seen whether the Scottish Government will move from wishful thinking to firm commitments in its final report on proposals and policies, but the failure to meet the targets for the second year in a row does not augur well. Getting the right policies on transport and housing is crucial to meeting our climate change targets. As I said in our debate on housing associations last week, current support does not make it easy to build good-quality low-carbon social housing. Relying on using up reserves is not very sustainable and nor is that the sort of prudential policy that the Scottish Housing Regulator has called for. Overall, I agree with the direction of travel that we are offered in the documents, but I would like a greater commitment to speedier implementation and resources to match the commitments. I know that the minister will say that NPF3 is a planning document rather than a spending document, but the danger is that, like the draft RPP2, NPF3 will become just a wish list of things that we would like to do rather than a firm commitment to what will be achieved and a road map telling us how we get there.

The minister has clearly put a lot of effort into NPF3 and into getting his Cabinet colleagues on board—

Can the minister be sure that he will get the same buy-in from his Cabinet colleagues when they need to provide the necessary resources to put the plan into practice? Perhaps he can answer that in summing up.

I thank Paul Martin for bringing the motion to the chamber and for highlighting the important role of community-based housing associations. In my constituency, there are several organisations with properties, such as the Garrion People’s Housing Co-operative, the Forgewood Housing Co-operative and Wishaw and District Housing Association, all covering specific local areas. Others, such as Lanarkshire Housing Association and Clyde Valley Housing Association, cover bigger areas and are extending the geographical areas that they cover, while retaining strong community links. Garrion and Forgewood are both community-based housing co-operatives, which were set up by stock transfer in 1990 and 1994 respectively. Garrion operates in the Gowkthrapple area of Wishaw; the other operates in the Forgewood area of Motherwell. They work closely with each other, sharing management and other resources. Both housing co-operatives offer a wide range of housing opportunities, “consulting with and involving the community in key policy and other decisions.” Gowkthrapple in particular has benefited from Garrion’s creation of a community hub. Like all good housekeepers, the co-operative watches its pennies carefully to ensure that it can provide a value-for-money service. After all, its customers are its shareholders. Wishaw and District Housing Association was established in the first wave of community-based housing associations in 1978. Its initial aim was to improve and rehabilitate local housing provision, starting with the turn-of-the-century tenement flats that lacked amenities and were often structurally problematic. Since 1990, the association has turned its attention to building new housing. Wishaw and District Housing Association and the two co-ops aim to provide high-quality, affordable homes for rent. They also help people to own their own homes via schemes such as those involving shared ownership. In more recent times, the organisations have been severely hampered by tight funding and reduced allocations per property. Grants per unit have fallen from 60 per cent of the cost of construction to below 40 per cent, and they have almost halved in cash terms. That has made new build more difficult, and it restricts housing associations’ capacity to buy and develop new sites. Looking to properties with higher rents to offset that has been made more difficult by welfare reform, which is undermining income from existing tenants.

I want to move on. All organisations are being encouraged to use up their reserves, but those can be used only once, and they are then left without anything to fall back on in adversity. That runs counter to the prudential approach that was recommended by the Scottish Housing Regulator to meet the risks of the current economic climate. All organisations need to set aside contingency resources. To operate with fingers crossed and an assumption that nothing will go wrong is simply irresponsible. Financial capacity has also been affected by the wider financial situation. Borrowing is more difficult, and some lenders are using more borrowing as a reason for seeking to reprice existing loans. Pressure is increasing on the existing stock and the ability of housing associations to undertake major repairs and renewals, including meeting higher energy efficiency obligations. There is great strength in being community based in respect of accountability and responsiveness to local needs. The Scottish Government should not jeopardise that by stretching community-based housing association resources to the point at which it affects their ability to do the job that they have done so well for the past 40 years.

8. To ask the Scottish Government when it will publish its final second report on proposals and policies. (S4O-02212)

Industry, non-governmental organisations and the public would like to know whether the final version will move from the wishful thinking of proposals to a proper plan that is based on policies, adequate funding, appropriate timescales for action, and incentives to achieve the transformational change, particularly in housing and transport sectors, that was identified by the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee.

7. To ask the Scottish Government how many further education students with learning difficulties have taken up supported employment after completing their courses, in each of the last three years. (S4O-02141)

I thank the cabinet secretary for that “kind of” answer. Again, he failed to answer the question with any figures. Will the learning disability strategy—the launch of which I understand has now been put back a couple of weeks until 13 June—make more supported employment available for people with learning disabilities after they leave college? Will there be measures in the strategy to address that?

What people can do at what age has always been something of a guddle. The inconsistency in allowing a person to join the army and fight for their country while not allowing them to vote has been commented on many times. The voting age used to be 21—or 30 for women when they first got the vote—and I am sure that some of us in the chamber might have been among the first 18-year-olds to vote in the 1970 general election. Now we are talking about further reducing the age to 16. At 16, a person can get married, work full time, drink in a restaurant—the ability to buy their own drink comes later—or buy a lottery ticket, and by 17 they are also allowed to drive a car. As it stands, however, they cannot vote. As I said, it is a bit of a guddle, but considering what people can do when they are 16, it seems churlish to continue to exclude 16 and 17-year-olds from voting. Although we are considering voting in the referendum today, Labour has proposed that voting at the age of 16 should apply to all elections, not just the referendum. Let us face it—I am sure that all members agree—if someone is eligible to vote on the status of their country for the foreseeable future in a referendum on leaving the United Kingdom, surely they are fit to vote in elections that put people in power for only four or five years. Of course, I recognise the damage that can be done in four or five years, but if it does not include the irretrievable break-up of a successful partnership with neighbouring countries, the damage can largely be undone after the following election. Lowering the voting age is not as straightforward as some might imagine. For starters, there is the issue of how to compile the list of eligible voters without compromising the personal data of those who are not yet old enough to vote. However, with a can-do attitude, such difficulties are not insurmountable. There are other complications. We want people from Scotland who are serving abroad in the UK’s armed forces and families who are with them, including 16 and 17-year-olds, to be able to vote. By working together and not separately, the EROs and the MOD will ensure that any difficulties that that presents will be overcome. With regard to prisoners, as my colleagues have said, we are not in favour of changing their normal exclusion from voting, but we should be able to see what legal advice the Scottish Government has received—or is this where the can’t-do attitude kicks in? I say to the cabinet secretary that if that legal advice is available, why does she not just publish it and remove all doubt?

As I said, all I am asking is that if the information is there, why not provide it and remove all doubt? We must look beyond the issues of who can vote and who will vote. There is no doubt that the legitimacy of the referendum results in relation to the proportion of the population who voted will be subject to scrutiny. We should bear in mind the fact that voter apathy has seen turnout for Scottish Parliament elections drop from more than 58 per cent in 1999 to about 50 per cent in subsequent elections. Turnout in Scotland for Westminster elections is also falling, from 72.6 per cent in 1987 to 63.8 per cent in 2010, having been lower still in 2001 and 2005, when we had the lowest turnouts for the UK as a whole since the introduction of the universal franchise. The Electoral Commission estimates that registration levels are running at a little more than 90 per cent and that, although the percentage of unregistered voters might be as low as 6 per cent in some areas, in areas of high levels of deprivation it can be more than 30 per cent. In particular social groups in those areas, more than half of those who are eligible remain unregistered. We want a clear-cut decision that settles the question of Scotland’s constitutional future and puts paid to the distraction that every issue is subservient to it and overshadowed by it. That will not be achieved if there is a close result and a low turnout. In the first instance, therefore, we must pay particular attention to encouraging high levels of voter registration; having done that, we must then encourage a high turnout in the referendum.

I welcome the intervention of the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations in the issue and its suggestions for targeting hard-to-reach potential voters, who are notably more numerous in areas of social deprivation, among young people and in black and ethnic minority groups, as has been highlighted by the Electoral Commission research. In conclusion—

We must try to inspire people to vote, not put them off the idea. For many, this will be their first opportunity to vote. It will be a once-in-a-lifetime vote for everybody. Let us ensure that the running of the referendum does justice to that.

2. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will introduce regulations to the effect that charges other than rent and a limited refundable deposit may not be levied on tenants. (S4O-02066)

Will the minister use her powers to make it clear that charges for credit checks or anything else except rent and a defined maximum deposit are not acceptable?

I declare an interest as a member of Community union. I thank Neil Findlay for securing the debate and for campaigning on the issue. There is significant common ground between blacklisting and my members’ business debate last week on international workers memorial day when we remembered all those who had lost their lives or suffered injury and ill health because of poor health and safety in the workplace. It was highlighted during that debate that many people were put on the blacklist because they dared to question unsafe practices that threatened workers’ lives and wellbeing. Between the two debates, we have had the May day international workers day, when we celebrate the strength of the labour movement. We therefore have good cause to look at the victimisation of those who raise concerns about safety, to highlight the links between poor health and safety and the lack of unionisation in the workplace, to talk about people who have lost their jobs and livelihoods because they tried to do something about the situation and to examine what we can do, the policies that we can adopt and the action that we can take to ensure that such victimisation is not tolerated in a society that cares about its workers’ safety and wellbeing. Many of those on the blacklist were employed—or, to be more accurate, denied employment—in the construction industry. This is an industry that has one of the worst health and safety records outside agriculture; which, like agriculture, is notoriously anti-union; and in which people have been sacked and even charged with conspiracy for attempting to organise. The list of subscribers to the Consulting Association reads like a “Who’s Who” of the construction industry; as Neil Findlay has already pointed out, although some are no longer members, the damage has been done. We all know that people who challenge unsafe practices and organise a workforce to fight against dangerous working conditions should be heroes, but the big construction companies try to make them zeroes by operating a blacklist. What can we do to protect them and encourage good practice? The ICO might have busted the Consulting Association but, in its own words, “compiling and operating an intelligence database, even where this is done covertly, does not automatically breach the Data Protection Act.” That means that anyone who is determined enough can still operate. The way forward has been set out and we must start with central and local government’s dealings with construction companies. Should we be giving contracts to those that have poor health and safety records and which victimise trade unionists? Indeed, it has been suggested that that should be added to the ethical criteria for procurement. Moreover, the fact that bad health and safety has consequences for society and puts a burden on health and other services is an economic criterion that should be taken into account. As Roz Foyer from Unite and the blacklist support group said just over an hour ago, there needs to be no more rhetoric and no more hypocrisy. We need to send a clear message to employers that we will not support such victimisation. Let us have that public inquiry.

I am sure that everyone—including the press itself, to some extent—would agree that the press gets it wrong sometimes. It was reported a couple of years ago that 30,000 pigs had floated down the Dawson river in Australia. The following day’s Morning Bulletin newspaper explained that the piggery owner actually said to the reporter that there were 30 sows and pigs. That must be one of the few occasions on which the correction got wider coverage than the original report. I highlight that as an example, but the victims of misreporting usually struggle to get corrections, and when they do, they are very lucky if the correction gets anything like equal prominence. Most printed stories used to have a relatively short lifespan, but the internet means that misreporting can persist for a long time. It can be thrown up in search results often without any link to a subsequent correction, let alone a correction made or added to the original article. The damage that is done to people’s reputations and health cannot easily be undone. The rich can seek financial reparation but not many people have enough money to sue the media. That is why we need a better system that insists on matters being put to right. Voluntary codes have repeatedly been shown not to be enough. The situation has been reviewed countless times—about once a decade for the past 70 years. A Press Complaints Commission that is stacked with newspaper people and appointments that the press has the power to veto will never make the grade. We need a system that is independent of Government and free from media interference, that speaks up for people who have been badly treated, and that has the power to address the injustices caused by people’s treatment by the press. We need a system that can regulate press conduct and make a difference when the press crosses the line, that protects people from prurient invasion of privacy, and that can differentiate between issues in which the public has a legitimate interest and those that should be the personal preserve of people who are in the public spotlight. We need a system that values accuracy and can adequately address inaccurate reporting. We do not want a system that threatens the freedom of the press. For example, the regulator will not have the power to block publication. Our press should have nothing to fear from a good regulatory system. Newspapers that sign up with the regulator will gain advantage from the terms of legal costs, and claims could be dismissed on the grounds that the claim was frivolous or vexatious, or on other, legitimate grounds. That should help to restore newspapers’ somewhat tarnished reputation so that they can become the purveyors of reliable, factual content that has been obtained in the public interest through principled investigative means. It could be argued that they have often fallen short of an ideal that was generally more of a myth than a reality; nevertheless, it is an ideal to which some have aspired and to which all should aspire. Despite that, we know that the press is still not keen, and why should it be when its excesses led to the proposals and are now being reined in? We need a UK solution. Most members of the press are owned by companies that operate across the UK, and many publications cover the whole UK. Even those that print only local editions have online editions that transcend national boundaries. In seeking consistency of approach, it has been recognised that various aspects of Scotland’s law and institutions need to be taken into account. However, as was stated to the Education and Culture Committee, such issues could be addressed by a relatively small number of largely technical amendments. I welcome the motion and hope that it will put an end to the days when the empires of Murdoch and other media moguls could ignore the rule of law and common decency. No amount of compensation can offset the impact of wrongful reporting, so if a new system can make the press sit up and take notice, that is to be welcomed.

I thank everyone who is attending the debate, who signed the motion, who contributed to the shoes exhibition and who went out of their way to support me—the hazards campaign, families against corporate killers, the Scottish Trades Union Congress and the GMB and Community trade unions—in my first members’ business debate, which is on international workers memorial day. I also welcome Bill Kidd’s motion, and his sponsorship of the hazards exhibition. I was moved to read the poem “Empty Shoes” by health and safety campaigner Wendy Lawrence, which starts: “No more footsteps on the path as you come home I just sit here with my grief—so all alone No key is turned by you in our front door No sound of walking to me across our floor I've cried so much my eyes are red and sore Empty shoes, no more you—just empty shoes.” Wendy wrote that after reading about yet another avoidable death that had been caused by work. That spurred me to organise the exhibit that will be on display in the public lobby from today until next week’s debate on blacklisting—many people who are blacklisted have merely raised health and safety concerns. We all know that statistics do not have the same emotional power as poems do to describe the depth of grief that is suffered by the families and friends of victims. However, they show the enormity of the issue. The International Labour Organization estimates that, globally, one worker dies every 15 seconds, that more than 2.3 million deaths a year are due to occupational accidents or diseases, that 160 million workers suffer work-related illnesses and that more than 300 million people are injured in workplace accidents. For the economists, that adds up to 4 per cent of global gross domestic product lost at a cost of £1 trillion. In the United Kingdom, there were 173 worker deaths last year, which was down from double that figure 20 years ago. However, that figure does not include members of the public who were killed or injured in workplaces. The number of non-fatal accidents at work has also fallen considerably over the past 10 years, from about 1 million to 600,000. As well as deaths at work, UK Government figures show that at least 20,000 people died from work-related injuries and illnesses such as occupational cancers, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cardiovascular disorders and through work-related road traffic accidents. However, estimates of underreporting suggest that the real figure may be as high as 50,000. In Scotland, although the figures for workplace illness and injury dropped, the number of fatalities rose to 20. Not for the first time, the Scottish rate is higher than the UK rate, which may be because construction and agriculture are larger parts of our economy and have higher accident rates; agriculture itself accounts for two thirds of worker deaths. However, neither explanations, nor the falling trends, are cause for complacency—any death is one too many. If we could address the Scottish situation by getting health and safety devolved to the Scottish Parliament, I believe that that is what we should do. Historically, health and safety improvements have not come from above. Workers in industries such as the steel industry have had to contend with poor safety regimes and have fought, through their unions, to get improvements. My background is in the steel industry, which plays a central role in my constituency, so I am well aware of the steelworkers’ struggle. I look forward to the creation of a steelworkers memorial at Ravenscraig to mark the lives and health that have been lost as a result of the steel industry. My best wishes go to North Lanarkshire Trades Union Council for its event at 12 o’clock on Sunday in the Summerlee museum of Scottish industrial life, and to the dozen or more other events throughout Scotland. While we “Remember the dead”, we must still “fight for the living.” In the UK, despite its figures suggesting that low-risk workplaces account for more than half of workplace deaths, the Government has withdrawn unannounced health and safety inspections and workers are still pressured by their employers to meet unattainable targets, with the upshot that safety standards can be ignored. Let us thank our union safety reps for the crucial work that they undertake, often in difficult circumstances, to resist such pressures. Let us also remember that this is international workers memorial day. As the disaster in Bangladesh reminds us, there is still much more that we can do. We should oppose cheap goods being produced at the cost of people’s lives and wellbeing, and we should insist on multinationals taking preventative action, rather than just paying lip service after the event. That is why we need an international workers memorial day. I close with the closing lines of “Empty Shoes”: To honour your great sacrifice I hope your workmates unionise And do it soon before another dies In remembrance of you - no more empty shoes.

Will the member take an intervention?

After reading all the criticisms, it is difficult to imagine how the Scottish Government can argue that the bill is fit for purpose. Indeed, it is difficult to see how it can argue that the bill is not fatally flawed or, at best, in need of a major overhaul. There has been widespread criticism of the bill—not least because of its centralisation of power in the hands of the cabinet secretary. I will start with what might seem to be the mildest criticism in the committee’s report on the bill—until it is translated to take account of the understatement of the cabinet secretary’s allied majority on the committee. The overall conclusion states: “The Committee has some concern”. This is not a minor concern of the sort that would not survive the private meeting in which the report was finalised, and nor is it the sort of concern that could languish in obscurity in lesser paragraphs. The concern is too serious to be restricted to the lesser conclusions of the report, but is so great that it forms a significant part of the overall conclusion. The concerns, which are “expressed in the relevant sections of the report”, are more about the specific means by which the bill will achieve its principles. In other words, it is not clear how it will do what it sets out to do. The report says: “The Committee has asked the Cabinet Secretary for various pieces of information that will provide reassurance”, which could be translated as, “Captain! Our shields have failed!” What about the “relevant sections”? On university governance, there is something fundamentally undemocratic about seeking powers to ensure compliance with principles that are not in the bill and are not yet defined or agreed elsewhere. Tony Brian of Glasgow Caledonian University noted: “The provision seems to give future ministers the ability to choose any code of governance that they want”.—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 19 February 2013; c 2013.] The governance code, which the university chairs are drafting, will not be ready until after evidence taking on the bill, so holding back the bill would allow such failings to be addressed. The cabinet secretary has recognised some of the shortcomings, such as a lack of gender balance in governance. Encouragement to lodge Opposition amendments at stage 2 tacitly acknowledges the bill’s weaknesses. Perhaps, in the spirit of political consensus, we should take the entire bill away for a while and overhaul it for him. I welcome the recognition of the obstacles that face people who live in areas of high deprivation, which is a major factor in people not realising their potential. However, it seems to be unnecessarily restrictive and lacking in flexibility to have certain postcode areas as the sole indicator of deprivation. As Lead Scotland noted, that will not help other disadvantaged groups, “such as disabled students and carers”. The cabinet secretary claims NUS Scotland support for his agenda, but I note that NUS Scotland seeks clearer legislative action, including an annual review by Parliament “to ensure that we are on track to get to greater fair access in less than 40 years.”—[Official Report, Education and Culture Committee, 19 February 2013; c 1988.] However, the bill and its accompanying documents shed little light on how such improvements will happen, or on the consequences for universities that fail to deliver.

No. I have previously expressed my doubts about the motivation behind college regionalisation, and have highlighted the lack of evidence of any educational benefits. It seems to be clear that the main impetus for college reform is cost saving, with inevitable consequences for students, staff and courses. Many of the changes are already under way in a hasty and haphazard fashion. What does the bill add to that mess? There may be good reasons why the cabinet secretary wants more power to get rid of chairs and other board members, but without the principles that underpin such powers being explained, people will think the worst. It might have helped to allay suspicions if there had been meaningful consultation on the appointment of interim regional chairs, and wider involvement and more transparency in the appointment of board members. I am concerned about the regional strategic bodies, which seem to have a somewhat undefined but potentially damaging scope to act as mini funding councils, thereby adding another layer of controlling bureaucracy rather than enabling bureaucracy. If we add that to the extension of powers for the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, we have a nice accumulation of power and resources that are being taken away from those who provide education. All in all, the impact of the bill seems to be to build barriers to transparency and to concentrate power in the hands of central Government and its obedient satellites. If that is not the intention and the bill is really meant to improve the quality of education, it would be a good idea for the cabinet secretary to take it away for a while to address the committee’s concerns and to reassure it.

In the interests of unredacted fairness and transparency, will the First Minister agree to have a live public debate with Alistair Darling as the leader of better together when we get to see the far-too-long-awaited white paper in November, to help the Scottish people in all airts and pairts to make an informed decision about the future of Scotland? First Minister, will you agree or are you just a big feartie? [Interruption.]

The statistics on dementia tell only part of the story. We also need to hear the personal experiences of those with dementia and the carers and families who support them. That is why the project is so valuable and why I thank Jackie Baillie for lodging the motion. I also thank Tommy Whitelaw, the dementia carers’ voices champion, and others who provide a platform for carers’ views on the work that they are doing. I recently met people with dementia and their carers in my constituency when I attended a living well with dementia cafe that meets monthly at Motherwell Football Club’s Fir Park stadium with the aim of raising awareness of dementia in the community. It is a fantastic service that provides a regular meeting point for people with dementia and Alzheimer’s and their carers, giving them the opportunity to meet healthcare professionals and stakeholders in dementia care to discuss any concerns that they have. I was struck by the activity that the cafe brings to the community. I am certain that the vibrancy of that meeting made people feel welcome, comforted and understood. No one was excluded, and staff did an excellent job in providing reassurance and advice to all 60 people who attended. The service is invaluable to our community. With the increasing prevalence of Alzheimer’s and dementia, it is vital that people do not feel alone in their concerns. We need many more such services. Hearing what my constituents had to say made it clear to me that we need to enhance the services that are available to support them and to look carefully at the Scottish Government’s policy on the development of those services. Carers—whether of people with dementia or people who require care for other reasons—contribute an enormous amount to society, but that contribution is not easy to measure and is not generally recognised by the bean counters, statisticians and economists. It is only when we look at what it would cost the state to provide the support that they give—about £10 billion for the Scottish economy—that we realise just how much we are in their debt. The health services and central and local government should take that on board in their policy making and activities. Dementia carers and other carers deserve a network of support that can address their specific needs, whether from day to day or in a crisis. They need to know how and where to get help, and that help must be available when it is needed. They need support in maintaining their own health under the pressures of caring, and they need support as they struggle with fuel and food poverty. The 250,000 carers who work need the understanding and support of their employers so that they can combine work with their caring responsibilities, and young carers need the support of their schools and colleges as they combine study with their caring role. I welcome the project, which is contributing to meeting that need through visits, talks, publications and social and other media. The project also makes clear the need for those providing services to know more about the person with dementia and the linked need for consistency in who provides the services. I thank the project for delivering those messages and sincerely hope that they are taken on board.

The arguments for integration of health and social care have always been strong. Over the past 20-odd years there have been successive, but not uniformly successful, attempts to move services in that direction, and each fresh attempt has encountered fresh obstacles. Too often, reforms are seen as an opportunity to pass on responsibility while retaining funding, which is always more tempting in an era of shrinking budgets. Partners have signed up to integration, but it is too easy for initiatives to be seen as solutions for one partner’s immediate problems, such as bedblocking, without their being too concerned about how the solution works in practice. It makes good financial sense to support people in the community—I have been told that it costs four times as much to support an in-patient—but financial gains should not come at the expense of the overall quality of services and support. That is difficult to avoid when local government is severely cash constrained. With real-terms cuts in central Government funding, an underfunded council tax freeze and few other sources of income for local government, something has to give, and it appears to me that the most vulnerable are among the biggest givers. They are faced with either losing services or paying for them. As freedom of information evidence has shown, income generation does not come only from car parking and leisure charges. It is clear that social care charges have increased, and that the pattern of cuts and charges is uneven. We could even call it a postcode lottery. I congratulate councillors who have done their best to protect services while keeping charges down, and I lay the responsibility for their dilemma firmly and squarely with the Scottish Government. That said, this is not just about budgets. The postcode lottery that is faced by Scotland’s elderly and disabled people is exacerbated by the lack of a coherent and consistent strategy for care. We need clearer plans from the Scottish Government to address the demographic challenge that we face. We also need better funding for health and social care to meet the needs of the increasing numbers of service users. We need to build consensus, which is difficult when the current situation pits partners against each other. We need to avoid service developments being held back by the people in power taking a narrow view of a service in a particular location, rather than recognising the best interests of the service users across an area. Cross-party support for better joined-up health and social care services is undermined by the current set-up, which fosters annual conflict. However, by concentrating on structural reform at senior level in the organisations and by focusing on who controls budgets, the Scottish Government is neglecting questions about how to improve services on the ground—that is what I am told by the people on the ground. Change should happen, but it needs to be driven by reviewing at local level what works well and what can be improved by integrating health and social care services. Local delivery needs a strengthened role for local authorities, not a diluted one. A fully integrated delivery structure should be led by local authorities and underpinned by legislation. There should also be straightforward and direct Scottish Government funding to health and social care partnerships using an allocation system that is sensitive to local needs. It is significant that much of the current agenda is being driven by an attempt to prevent bedblocking, but bedblocking is not an issue in all areas so not all councils or health boards will start from the same base. The proposals as they stand are focused on structure, on which budgets are to be included and on who controls those budgets; they say little about the outcomes that need to be delivered. Let me come to a conclusion. The cabinet secretary has said that this is a “revolution”, and Iain Gray has said that we must not wait for another 20 years. Let us provide the care that people expect to receive in an open and transparent system that supports delivery, with local health and social work organisations that can locally determine the best way to deliver outcomes. Let us get away from the current divide-and-rule tactics, which I do not think the cabinet secretary is trying to recreate. Instead, let us concentrate on creating a national care service that truly integrates health and social care services.

The cabinet secretary will know more than most that in order to make the most of their shrinking budgets, Motherwell and Cumbernauld colleges have put a lot of hard work into the merger.

Although Coatbridge College is no longer part of the process, will the cabinet secretary give assurances that the Government will fully support Motherwell and Cumbernauld colleges and ensure that they are in no way disadvantaged by Coatbridge’s withdrawal?

Although the Scottish Labour Party has always been committed to ensuring that we have “the best obtainable system of popular administration and control”, we do not back reform for the sake of it. Reform should be systematic, strategic and proactive; however, it seems that what we have is haphazard, strategy-light and reactive. I have noticed that people with local government backgrounds often have bright ideas about making things better but, unfortunately, they are generally off the payroll before their ideas emerge. Two years ago, the spending review outlined the public sector reform themes of partnership, prevention and performance that the Local Government and Regeneration Committee is now looking at. Although the cabinet secretary—who, unfortunately, is not in the chamber at the moment—gave a robust defence of the progress being made, the evidence that we have heard suggests that progress is slow. Is that because of the difficulties of maintaining tried and tested services in an era of austerity? If so, what capacity does that leave for improving accountability and participation, fulfilling social and environmental goals, and switching the emphasis of service provision to prevention? The committee also heard about numerous problems. Initiatives are isolated and often occur as a reaction to events and circumstances such as budgetary pressures or legislative changes. Although in some cases the spur is better value, the pressure on budgets is clearly an obstacle to progress. Because the transition to preventative spending often requires short and medium-term funding and resources in order to make long-term gains, change is happening slowly and lacks consistency and coherence. That is not entirely the fault of public sector bodies. The Scottish Government seems to prefer arm’s-length arrangements, but that should not free it of responsibility when things are not happening or when cuts are making it hard for reforms to happen. If we are serious about promoting reform, it must be properly supported by a framework of resources, transitional funding and guidance.

Reform should be collective. I will probably touch on that later. We also need to address the long list of obstacles. For example, in benchmarking and monitoring, consistency is difficult, outcomes are hard to define and indicators can become objectives. Reform is a long-term project, which needs a long lead-in time and long-term commitments, for example on workforce planning. It takes time to get partnership buy-in and build trust among central Government, local government and stakeholders. Because the timescale extends beyond the electoral cycle, effective reform needs political consensus if it is to be implemented and embedded. That is all the more reason for having a well-thought-out strategy that has been developed in partnership with and applied consistently throughout the public sector, by which I mean not just local government but the national health service and other public bodies. The strategy must work across the Scottish Government, too. Community planning partnerships should be part of the solution but they appear to be part of the problem. We heard that there is a lack of clarity about the roles, responsibilities and accountability of the people who are involved. There have been complaints about top-down, tokenistic and tick-box approaches, a lack of transparency and a silo mentality.

I am in my last minute, but I will say that best practice must be shared among everyone and not just the people who are in a position to take a top-down approach. Few examples and little data were provided to the committee. What was provided contained only limited reference to the Christie commission. It is difficult to say whether that was because the examples are not there or because examples are not being reported. Good examples included community-based housing associations, the West Lothian CPP hub and projects in which £1 spent through a CPP could save a community £14 down the line. We heard about a community organisation that received £1,000 to create an allotment, which provided a year-long supply of vegetables for the community. We heard about a craft cafe, for which the social return was £8 for every £1 of investment. It was suggested that empty public properties should be made available to community groups. As one of my committee colleagues asked, what contribution to regeneration is made by building new offices that lie empty? Since I started writing this speech I have received an interesting document from COSLA that promotes its route map to reform, which is based on statutory duties, accountability, national co-ordination and locally-integrated services. COSLA talks about using “all the levers of reform—from public policy to legislation, from public finance to governance, in order to optimise the benefits that can be felt by our communities.”

If COSLA thinks that Government needs statutory duties and legislation, to strengthen the approach, who are we to argue?

The Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government must deliver that, through a properly-resourced strategic approach.

Once again we are debating an underfunded settlement with a Scottish Government intent on pushing councils off the economic cliff. Over the next two weeks, councils will meet to agree deep cuts in their budgets. John Swinney, who yesterday was quick to accuse others of hypocrisy, says that he is proud of his budgets, but will he be proud of the cuts and the damage done when councils are forced to consider increasing charges for their services, closing schools, cutting play parks and leisure facilities, reducing staff, cutting voluntary sector funding and closing or reducing opening hours for libraries, local offices and other facilities? Possibly the only thing that they will not be cutting is the grass. Councils simply cannot reduce spending without reducing employment, and the minister should know that that hits the local economy, further depressing council income. Local authorities face further decline in their share of Scottish Government expenditure. Despite local government’s share of the budget now being less than 30 per cent, it is getting 50 per cent of this year’s cuts on top of the heavy cuts last year. The council tax, which is the main alternative source of income, is frozen. The Scottish Government talks of partnership with COSLA, but it withholds £70 million until councils surrender to its diktat. Is that a partnership? I do not think so. Good partners do not use a big stick to get their own way.

No. I will not take any interventions from people who applaud college cuts. We hear a lot from the Government about prevention, but preventative services are being eroded by Mr Mackay’s and Mr Swinney’s cuts. A stitch in time saves nine, but that is a bit difficult when the Scottish Government has cut the thread. The deeper the cuts, the harder the decisions become. Local authorities are beyond trimming excess. They are now cutting to the bone, and that means jobs. What price the Scottish Government’s policy of no compulsory redundancies if it forces others down that road? Doubtless Mr Swinney will claim that it is not his fault. It is your fault, Mr Swinney. The public know that it is your fault, for you have compounded the UK austerity with council cuts that are two and a half times the cuts to the Scottish budget. Ministers say that they would make different choices after separation, but why not make them now? Why make local government pay the price while ministers fail to stimulate growth with their grossly underperforming non-profit-distributing model? Why hit local authorities with an additional £17 million funding gap on council tax benefit? Why are you not protecting local authorities from the impact of the Tory welfare reforms? Why spend so much time and use so many resources on the dogma of separation? No doubt councils will be blamed—particularly those that are run by other parties—for any problems that arise from the Scottish Government cuts, but let us be honest. This is not a settlement but an imposition. You, cabinet secretary, and the Minister for Local Government and Planning, Mr Mackay, in being so weak and not standing up for local authorities, are responsible for the damage that the Scottish Government is doing. As for the Scottish Government’s tame back benchers, who are chained to their leadership by a goal of independence, are they really happy with the cuts to local government? How far does the prospect of independence need to recede before we find out? Or will their seal-like applause just get louder to hide their growing unease?

9. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing last spoke to the chief executive of NHS Lanarkshire. (S4O-01777)

Has the cabinet secretary discussed with NHS Lanarkshire the letters from Lanarkshire Links that ask about the seven-month delay in implementation of the mental health plan for North Lanarkshire that was endorsed by Nicola Sturgeon? If the cabinet secretary is not the cause of that delay, why are we still waiting for the plan to go to the board?

Given that the strategy builds on existing Scottish Government policy, why has the Lanarkshire mental health services plan—which was in line with the strategy and approved by Nicola Sturgeon, when she was Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy, in August last year—still not been implemented? Is the minister aware that, since 26 September, when the minister took over responsibility for the plan, Alex Neil has continued to be involved as Cabinet Secretary for Health and Wellbeing and that he wrote to Pamela Nash MP on the matter on 5 November?

Will the minister give way?

The debate is an extremely broad discussion of planning that extends from how we deal with alterations to individual properties to our nation’s overarching economic development plan for the next decade or more. However, there are some principles that link how we approach the fine-brush points at local level with the extended national canvas, not least of which is the pitfall of allowing the process to become an obstacle, rather than a means of facilitating and fulfilling planning objectives. We need to retain flexibility to meet changing needs. Plans are important, but they should not be set in stone, impervious to new situations and incapable of adapting to evolving opportunities. The planning fee increase goes some way towards addressing the problem that local authorities face, but does not address it fully. Local authorities should be able to recoup the full cost of planning—no more and no less. We are told that the 20 per cent increase will raise £4 million to £5 million, but I understand that the deficit from planning in North Lanarkshire alone is £2 million and cost recovery through fees dropped from 81 per cent in 2004-05 to 56 per cent in 2010-11.

Although we all fully acknowledge that we are in difficult economic times, those hard economic times should not be a burden for North Lanarkshire Council. We should ensure that no planning application costs any more or less because of the way that it is processed. The money in the planning deficit could have been spent on other hard-pressed council services. The caps on charges mean that the council often subsidises bigger developments, even though the developers could probably manage to pay more. Why is it so important to keep reminding us that fees are lower than they are in England? Is it some sort of competition? If so, where are the other countries in the league table? Should we not just ensure that we have the right level of fees for Scotland—full stop? Planning should be neither an income-generation scheme nor a drain on resources.

No. The drain on resources, I am advised, is from the many applications that come in that cost the council and other services money to process. That is not fair. Not only does it take money away from badly needed services, but it is causing failure in planning departments and other services. Planning should be neither an income-generation scheme nor a drain on resources. The former may be a tempting prospect for some, but the latter is more likely in practice and puts an additional burden on already severely cash-strapped councils. There should be a duty on planning authorities to keep their costs as low as possible. Indeed, it would be in the interests of economic development for them to do so. If there is also a justification for subsidising planning costs, that should be transparent, accountable and up for discussion. Some members will point to community gain as an offset for planning and other costs that fall on local authorities. It is, of course, an important element in seeking to ensure that the wider community benefits from development, but we should not think of it as an unqualified gain. There is a need to ensure that planning gain is appropriate to, and commensurate with, the scale of the development. We should also remember that it tends to be a one-off gain and that the local authority is left with continuing commitments to infrastructure and maintenance. One idea that has been discussed in considering how to streamline the system is to allow greater powers to grant permission based on precedent. One side of that coin is a reduction in inconsistent decisions, but we must be careful not to generalise too much and to take full account of differing circumstances. I note that planning performance is to be reviewed and that consideration will be given to linking it with the reform of fees. I hope that that will avoid a simplistic view of performance. As an example, take the requirement to deal with a planning application within a specified time. In order to achieve that, the easiest course might be simply to refuse any application that does not meet the requirements. An alternative approach, which has been employed in North Lanarkshire, is to take time to discuss ways in which the application could be amended to help it to meet the necessary criteria. That avoids adding unduly to the applicant’s costs, but the application takes longer to deal with. The planning authority should not be in any way marked down or penalised for taking that accommodating approach. Clearly, speeding up the processing of local development plans is to be welcomed, but we must be careful that it is not done at the cost of comprehensive consultation and participation. We need a more joined-up policy with regard to conflicting objectives. On areas such as town centres, competition policy is important, but so too are consumer choice, employment and the overall health of the local economy. We also need to forge stronger links between major local developments and national developments.

In my constituency, we have the example of Ravenscraig. Its ambitious redevelopment has been a long time coming, but it continues to be pushed forward despite the adverse economic conditions. As it is Europe’s largest brownfield site redevelopment, I believe that it is a matter of national importance, so I hope to see it reflected in the third national planning framework.

Does the member believe that there are too many local authorities in Scotland?

Following the minister’s intervention in my speech, it appears that the cost-neutral option for planning fees is not on his radar. Does that mean that he thinks that it is right that planning applications by wealthy companies should be subsidised by council tax at the expense of education, social work and other local services?

4. To ask the Scottish Government how many wards were closed and patients were affected by norovirus outbreaks in hospitals in November 2012. (S4O-01579)

As The Herald reports today, the problem is growing. There have been an estimated 180,000 Scottish cases so far this year. Patients remain infectious after the symptoms disappear and, although advice has been issued that people should wait 48 hours before they visit hospitals or go back to work or school, many people are unaware of that. What is the Scottish Government doing to ensure that that message gets across to the public?

Youth unemployment is a huge problem, and it is getting worse. In my Motherwell and Wishaw constituency, there are more than 3,000 unemployed 16 to 24-year-olds. Young people need help. They need help to make the right choices about their future, to get qualifications, to acquire skills and to apply for jobs. I was not convinced that the right help was being provided so, a few months ago, I looked into the local careers service that is offered by SDS. I was not happy with what I found. For example, the local careers office is hidden away in Motherwell College and its location is not signposted. With thousands of young people in North Lanarkshire not in education, employment or training, and with the cuts in the college sector, it occurred to me that that may not be the most convenient location. To compound that, there is a 20 per cent reduction in front-line staff. I doubted that the face-to-face access provided by those staff could be replaced by pushing young people towards web access and centralised careers provision, so I also had a look at the my world of work website. There was one telephone number on the contact page, but even that was a helpline for using the website—it did not put people in touch with someone who could give careers advice. Searching the site for Motherwell or Wishaw returned a couple of couple of courses at the college, but—surprise, surprise—there was no link to the local careers advice office that was based in the college. Was that the minister’s vision for an improved service? It also came as no surprise to discover that, locally, only 14 per cent of the young people have registered on the my world of work website. That is only one in seven, which proves to me that the plan is not working. Will the minister explain why SDS is not co-operating with the academics who are conducting research into the new web-based service? What are the minister’s views on the previous research carried out for SDS? It has been identified that there are shortcomings in the system. I hope that the minister agrees that SDS should work with anyone who can help address the problems or improve the system. Having visited my constituency’s local careers office in Motherwell College, I was more convinced than ever that careers advice should be more easily accessible for all, which means somewhere central where people can go and speak face-to-face with an adviser. The staff whom I spoke to appreciated those concerns, so I decided to approach the council to see whether it could identify suitable premises in Motherwell or Wishaw town centre. When SDS was put on the spot, the inaccessibility of the service was clear. With only 14 per cent of young people signing up to the my world of work website, the weakness of the web-based solution cannot be denied. SDS agreed to work with the council. I am pleased to say that that has borne fruit, with the careers service now lined up to occupy part of the one-stop-shop in Motherwell. Of course, that victory for common sense is only part of what needs to be done, but it is also very much the exception to the rule, as has been heard from other areas. I am also concerned about the traffic-light system that is being used to filter young people in order to decide who deserves attention. For many young people, the system is failing to provide support. There is an issue about whether the support that is offered is appropriate to the categories and whether the categories are being correctly assigned or, in some cases, even assigned at all. The web system is aimed at the 75 per cent of the 16 to 19-year-olds who are in the green category. What we know of registrations suggests that only a quarter of them have actually signed up. Those pupils are those who fare best academically, but it is a mistake to assume that that translates into their not needing help with careers beyond what is provided on the my world of work website. It can be difficult for pupils to pick the right courses and plot out career destinations, whatever their level of academic ability or attainment. Where is the evidence to support SDS? How does it compare to the evidence that it does not want to talk about? The move to an appointments system is also making life difficult for older users, with drop-in opportunities diminishing and outreach for vulnerable youngsters being put out of reach. All in all, the picture is one of a service that is perpetuating a dogma that underpins its reforms, which are being shown to be unfit for purpose. The strong suspicion is that the dogma serves the purpose of saving money rather than of serving the people.

Although the Local Government and Regeneration Committee has completed its report on the budget, this is my first chance to question the cabinet secretary on the issue. We are asked to accept that the settlement is fair, but how can it be fair that local government is carrying the overwhelming burden of Scottish Government cuts? North Lanarkshire Council is suffering more than most. Services and more than 1,000 jobs are threatened in an area that desperately needs economic growth. Will we get the chance to explore the issue in my committee?

The FE sector is in a dire situation and we must honestly address the funding deficit, the damage that has been done and the cabinet secretary’s dismal performance. I understand how painful that must be for the cabinet secretary and how upset he must get when he is asked difficult questions such as, “If you knew the figures were wrong, why didn’t you tell the First Minister?” and, “Is that an apology?” I do not want to dwell on the debacle of the college budget inaccuracies for too long, but it is important to have the correct perspective on the figures. Even the true bottom line figures do not do that. The drop in final budgets from £555 million to £546 million hides inconvenient truths about how those figures are composed. The bottom line figure for 2012-13 includes £15 million for college transformation. Without that funding in 2013-14, the bottom line figure drops to £512 million, so I ask the cabinet secretary please to stop his pretence. This is not about bolstering the college sector; it is about managing its decline. Recent figures show that students from deprived areas are still disadvantaged in terms of getting to university, which makes college education an especially important factor in tackling deprivation. I am surprised that the cabinet secretary does not seem to understand that. While colleges struggle, universities have been cushioned from the cuts, which has prompted accusations of the rich being propped up at the expense of the poor. Universities attempt to address that by taking students from colleges. However, in my constituency, Motherwell College has had to refuse more than two thousand applications, so that will not be an easy route. I know that some people will have found places elsewhere, but for a variety of factors—not the least of which is costs—people tend not to travel far for college places. Given the axed courses and shortage of places, some people will not even have applied. There is also evidence that young people are staying on at school longer, which will increase future demand. In North Lanarkshire, more than 2,000 16 to 19-year-olds are not in education, employment or training. That figure will be an underestimate by 20 per cent or more, and I would bet that quite a few of those 2,500 young people applied to colleges. From their point of view, the Scottish Government’s pledge to 16 to 19-year-olds looks like a bad joke. For many, the FE sector is the doorway to higher education and the key to the labour market, and they must feel that the Scottish Government has locked that door and thrown away the key. This is the second year that there has been a problem for Motherwell College following cuts in funding, courses and staff. Nationally, cuts in FE teaching budgets saw staff numbers slashed by 1,300 last year. There is also a problem for older students, with the Government policy prioritising places for 16 to 19-year-olds as it tries to massage the youth unemployment figures.

I am not surprised by the number of interventions from SNP back benchers. I assume that the First Minister is planning a reshuffle. It is estimated that 70,000 people are being deprived of lifelong learning because part-time courses have been dropped. Those cannot be dismissed as mere “hobby” courses, because they all contribute to our ideal of a learning society. We might think that such large numbers of people being affected would concentrate the minds of ministers—for electoral reasons, if for no other—but I am told that the view has been expressed that there are no votes in college funding. Understanding the damage that has been caused is not just about recognising the big numbers that are involved. The individual consequences can, in many ways, bring home more strongly the short-sightedness and unfairness of the cuts. Deprived of a job, a course and the prospect of a life that is going somewhere, what do people do? Some rise above it and make a voluntary contribution to society, some sink into apathy and despair and some take out their anger on society. Everyone has to meet the costs of apathy and alienation, so what is the point of all the talk of preventative spending if we then cut college budgets? Would it not be far better to invest in the future of our people? Colleges also have a wider social role. A school in my area has a link arrangement with Motherwell College to enable secondary 5 and 6 pupils who have additional support needs to study part time in order to assist with the transition from school. That arrangement has now been cut back to just S6 students. How long before it goes completely? Is that what Mike Russell means by “substantial commitment”? Especially after recent events, it is clear that students and would-be students including the thousands in North Lanarkshire have no confidence in Mike Russell. College heads and staff have no confidence in Mike Russell. Many members here—possibly even among his colleagues—have no confidence in Mike Russell. The Government’s policies are wrong and must change. If that means that Mike Russell must go, that is fine by me.

Amendment 3 is designed to address the democratic deficit that has been created by the bill. The arguments for this amendment also apply to amendment 4, which deals with the corresponding legislation for partially occupied properties. The progress of the bill has raised serious concerns about the ability of this Parliament to ensure that there is effective scrutiny of legislation. The first reason for that is that the main effect of the bill is to remove limitations and to give additional powers to ministers. The impact of the bill is thus hugely dependent on how those powers are used through secondary legislation. The second reason is that getting a clearer picture of the Scottish Government’s intentions for the regulations—and the evidence to support them, which is important—has been tortuous. Time and again, information has been produced at the last minute or after the relevant discussions have taken place. Although the minister has now issued draft regulations to give a more favourable discount to properties that are reoccupied after being empty, they were made available only recently and there has not been an opportunity to scrutinise the evidence on that measure. That leads to the third reason: information has not been gathered about the impact of the bill in the form of a business and regulatory impact assessment. I therefore want to ensure that secondary legislation receives the parliamentary scrutiny that has so far been denied or at least diminished by how the bill has been treated to date. Only by the Parliament supporting my amendments can that be guaranteed. The alternative leaves the decision to the discretion of a small handful of MSPs. Without such scrutiny, we are being asked to put our faith in the minister and to trust him to do the right thing. I do not believe that that is why our constituents put us in this place. They expect us to be sceptical and to scrutinise the Scottish Government’s actions. It is our responsibility to examine and question legislation that gives powers to ministers and to examine and question how they are used. To do so, the Parliament needs the opportunity to assess and debate secondary legislation. That is particularly the case when much of the impact of a bill will be determined by the regulations that are issued by ministers. My amendments are designed to ensure that regulations will come back to the Parliament so that we can make a careful and considered judgment on them. Ministers are not infallible; I am sure that many will agree—even the odd minister—that they are far from infallible. If the Scottish National Party wants a mature democracy, it must overcome its fear of scrutiny—in this instance by supporting the affirmative procedure. I move amendment 3.

Neither the minister nor Mr Harvie have convinced me that I should withdraw my amendments. I will also support Sarah Boyack’s amendment, which complements mine. We need a proper assessment of the business and regulatory impact of the bill, not just a consultation before the bill, followed by the minister’s ad hoc promise of further consultation before regulations are issued. Without parliamentary consideration of proposals for regulations based on a proper assessment of their impact there is a significant danger that this part of the bill will do more harm than good, which is a risk that we should not take.

I supported the bill’s objectives, but I have not been convinced that it will achieve those objectives. The lack of evidence for and the shakiness of some of the assumptions that underpin the bill are such that the jury is still out on its effectiveness and on whether some actions could be counterproductive. As I have previously said, I am disappointed by the way in which the bill has been handled, which has been disrespectful of our democracy and our Parliament. Was it acceptable that information that the Scottish Government promised to supply on finance to assist with stage 2 deliberations was not received until the evening before the meeting when the Local Government and Regeneration Committee was to debate amendments? That was far too late to shed light on issues that had a bearing on amendments, and it followed a late response at stage 1 and difficulties in obtaining the Finance Committee’s assessment. We also had to contend with committee changes at stage 2; new members had not been involved in the evidence gathering and the debate. It should be noted that reviews of business rates, local taxation and town centres are being undertaken, all of which have a bearing. Despite that, the reasonable request for more time and further information was given short shrift. As a result, we are being pushed to sign a blank cheque with inadequate information about what it will be used for and what the impact will be. What does that say about the careful and proper consideration of legislation that we are supposed to undertake? It says that, despite the battering that it has taken, the Government is determined to undermine its credibility further and reduce it to a new low. We are left with legislation that could have an adverse impact and do more harm than good. The affirmative procedure has been denied us, but the regulations can still be given proper scrutiny, if SNP members do not block that. I say to them, “Don’t be afraid—accountability and scrutiny are supposed to be part of the democratic process.”

Virgin had promised investment in new services and station upgrades at Motherwell in my constituency. Naturally, I am keen to ensure that that takes place whatever the outcome of the current debacle. Will the minister ensure that support for that development is prominent in any representations that he makes?

14. To ask the Scottish Government how it ensures that national health service boards have a consistent approach when making decisions regarding individual patient treatment requests. (S4O-01319)

I recognise that the cabinet secretary inherited the problem from his predecessor, but the Scottish Government seems to be disengaged from the process. I have received written answers that show that health board policies are not monitored or compared, that decisions are not monitored, that panels and procedures for dealing with requests are not standardised, and that training for panel members is not standardised. Boards are supposed to have annual meetings, but none has occurred yet and no date is set for one. No details are available about contact between staff of different health boards. That is a recipe for a postcode lottery. How does the minister expect to ensure consistency when the Scottish Government is not even looking at those issues?

North Lanarkshire Council, which is one of Scotland’s leading local authorities, has announced that 1,300 job losses, many of them in my Motherwell and Wishaw constituency—

I apologise to the minister for being late. Last week, we discussed the plan for a steel workers’ memorial at Ravenscraig. I was pleased to see the support for that from the Government and Opposition back benchers, not just for the past but also for the future of Ravenscraig. Ravenscraig is Europe’s largest brownfield site and gives the Scottish Government the opportunity to stimulate the economy of not just North Lanarkshire and central Scotland but the whole of Scotland. [Interruption.] You will have to excuse me, Presiding Officer, but I have forgotten my reading glasses. This year, the NPF2 monitoring report notes that tax increment financing will support the second phase of development at Ravenscraig, However, the project should be more than just a regional priority. I call on the minister to ensure that NPF3 seizes the opportunity and moves beyond TIF and regional status for Ravenscraig regeneration, so that it becomes a substantial national development that is significant at European level and will boost Scotland’s economy.

I thank Clare Adamson for lodging the motion and I extend a warm welcome to the representatives of the memorial fund committee, who have joined us in the gallery. I declare an interest as someone who worked in the steel industry for 30 years. The subject is close to my heart and that of my constituency of Motherwell and Wishaw, which includes the Dalzell steel plant in Steelopolis, as Motherwell was nicknamed, and the neighbouring site of Ravenscraig, where the memorial is to be sited. The industrial history of Motherwell and Wishaw is dominated by steel producers, steel manufacturers, engineering firms and boilermakers, such as Marshall Fleming, Morton, Anderson Boyes, Findlay, Pickering, Bone, Connell & Baxter, Butters Bros, Clyde Alloy, Motherwell Bridge and, perhaps most famous, Colville, whose plants were nationalised and privatised twice and include the Dalzell plant, which is now part of Tata. Last, but not least, there was the beacon that lit up the sky at night—the Craig, which is, alas, no more. Hundreds of Lanarkshire workers lost their lives in the steel industry. The sculpture will commemorate them and all those who devoted their lives to the Scottish steel industry. Thousands of people who began their careers as fresh-faced innocents straight from school were, during their first days, amply supplied with requests from the gaffer such as “Go for a long staun,” “Get a bubble for the spirit level,” “Get the tartan paint,” or “Get a bucket of blue steam.” I am pleased that the motion recognises the work of the Scottish steelworkers memorial fund to promote the memorial. I thank supercounty for supporting the campaign and I hope that the difficult task of acquiring funding will have success. We should give credit to supercounty’s chief executive, John Scott, whose brainchild the memorial is. I welcome the discussions with sculptor Andy Scott, who is famous for large-scale public art, including the heavy horse by the M8. I note that the proposed 6m-high sculpture will depict “a steel worker rising out of smoke and molten metal releasing an athlete sprinting towards the county’s future.” In that spirit, the sculpture will be more than a memorial to the past. It will also be, as it should be, a commitment to the future. Scottish steel can again be central to Scotland’s economy, through emerging markets such as renewables. Government has a crucial role in building an industrial strategy that can deliver much-needed opportunity, and it must work with the steel industry to promote Scottish steel in a competitive global marketplace. The strategy must involve capital investment projects that provide opportunities for steel and other home-grown Scottish industries. I hope that the Scottish Government heeds the cross-party support that is being shown in the debate. I invite the Government to join us and put much-needed resources into the regeneration of Ravenscraig, to make Europe’s largest brownfield site a national priority and—once again—a beacon for the Scottish economy.

Communication with the Parliament is not the Scottish Government’s strong point. The minister mentioned the Local Government and Regeneration Committee report, but it would have been useful to have had the Government’s response to the committee’s report before the stage 1 debate, especially because the detail in the bill is so skimpy. The bill opens doors to the expansion of ministerial power, without making it clear how the new powers will be used. More powers are proposed for ministers, but criticism of the Government’s approach is easily curtailed in committees that are packed with loyal Government supporters. Now the Government has failed to respond to the committee before the debate on the principles of the bill. We could be forgiven for thinking that the Scottish Government is intent on circumventing the Scottish Parliament, but we must be mindful that in such a situation conspiracy is not the only possibility. We were promised a response before stage 2, but stage 2 amendments can be lodged when the debate is finished. Is the Government hoping to delay Opposition amendments?

As Sarah Boyack said, we should have had the information in time for the stage 1 debate, so that we could make a judgment on it. We needed the information today—not tomorrow or next week. The Scottish Government should give assurances and commitments, as well as information that sheds light on the darker recesses of the bill, thereby facilitating the lodging of amendments. Issues that the committee raised deserve a response, including the issues that were knocked back by the firewall of loyal back benchers, whose reluctance to be critical meant that we could not be critical about the lack of clarity in the policy memorandum and could say only that clarity might be lacking.

I will not take an intervention from Mr Stewart, because I am here to represent my constituents and not to help people who have aspirations or ambitions to become a minister. Despite the acknowledgement that assumptions were based on unknown quantities or potential variations, we could not describe assumptions as “speculative”—that was not acceptable. Likewise, noting that several witnesses had dared to question whether the bill would generate the resources that ministers claimed it would was regarded as going too far. On the plus side, ministerial assurances that local authorities will have discretion about using the new powers is welcome, tacitly acknowledging that they will not be to everybody’s benefit, albeit that it is not acknowledged in the revenue calculations. The shoddiness of the financial assertions is matched by the scantiness of the business consultation. Both could have been addressed through a BRIA.

No, because you have ministerial aspirations, too.

I am sorry, Presiding Officer—[Interruption.]

No. I need to make progress. The cost and extent of carrying out a BRIA would be proportionate—and small compared to the anticipated revenues from the scheme. If the Scottish Government is confident that its calculations and guesstimates are sound, it should have no fear of undertaking a BRIA. Conversely, its refusal to do so can be taken as an indication of a lack of confidence in its own case for the bill. The criticisms in the Finance Committee report were grudgingly noted by the Local Government and Regeneration Committee rather than accepted, and the lack of clarity and margins of uncertainty in the financial memorandum were judged unfortunate rather than unsatisfactory. Unfortunately, I do not find such failings satisfactory. The financial assertions behind the bill show great imagination. They have been defended as potential maximum amounts, but they are based on factors that are unlikely to deliver anything approaching those amounts. Does that matter? It matters if the money has been spent before it is raised and therefore must be raised elsewhere, if the costs of raising money outweigh the good that is done with it, or if people go out of business or properties are demolished. Those are not the intended consequences of the bill, and I accept that the Government introduced the bill in “good faith”—as the Local Government and Regeneration Committee report unnecessarily asserts. Is the bill fit for purpose? Although it is flawed, it can be amended to address the blight of unoccupied properties without inflicting greater harm elsewhere. If the bill brings people and businesses into unoccupied properties, making money should surely be secondary and not the driver for change—it may even be counterproductive, which is a point that was made in much of the evidence to the committee. I would be much happier about allowing the bill to go forward if the lack of consultation, highlighted by the committee, was addressed through a BRIA. That should happen as soon as possible, and I invite the minister to reconsider. Initially, I had a level of enthusiasm for and optimism about the bill, and it is difficult to argue against its intentions to address unoccupied properties. As the bill stands, it could do more harm than good, but I am prepared to consider improvements and, on that basis, I am supporting it.

It had been my intention to start by saying that I was sure that everyone would agree that long-term empty properties are a waste of resources, but I will now proceed by saying that that is my opinion. Let me take the example of a pigeon-infested property in Craigneuk in my constituency, the continued deterioration of which is unacceptable. When I wrote to one of the well-known banks that has a branch on nearly every high street the length and breadth of Scotland, it defended its inaction by saying that it was not the sole owner. At least it did not use a lack of funds as an excuse. I believe that something needs to be done, and I give the Scottish Government credit for trying. Although there are problems with the approach that it has taken, I do not agree with the conclusion of the Tory motion. As is so often the case, it is a matter of getting the right balance between the carrot and the stick. The bill, as far as it goes, is about wielding a big stick. It does not say much about providing help to bring properties back into use. In fact, it is all very woolly and vague. We are being asked to vote on a skeleton of a bill, and to trust ministers to put flesh on the bones by issuing regulations. Is it not ironic that a Government that argues for maximum devolution keeps asking this Parliament’s elected members to concentrate power in the hands of ministers?

The other issue with the bill is that it seems to be about income generation at least as much as it is about tackling empty properties. Those two purposes can be at odds with each other. Doing well at one means doing less well at the other. We have heard that the proposed scheme could raise £18 million. That figure is admitted to be a maximum, which is one way of saying that it is a fantasy figure. How many properties will be exempted? Some of the properties in question are very difficult to let or need significant renovation. If they are included in the scheme, it might not be for long. The English experience is that, in such circumstances, demolition—which has happened in one of the town centres in my constituency—can be a cheaper option. If money is needed for renovation and the banks are not lending, will support be given? When properties are council owned, we will be robbing Peter to pay Paul. The bringing back into use of properties will reduce income. The scheme will involve the spending of significant amounts on administration, adjudication, monitoring and, perhaps, assistance. How much of the £18 million will be left? We must also take into account other adverse consequences. For example, demolition might hinder economic recovery; there is evidence that rate rises result in job losses, as the National Assembly for Wales has highlighted; and hard-pressed firms might be forced out of business. Will the adverse consequences outweigh the benefits? We simply do not know, because we do not have studies to answer the questions and we do not know what the minister is planning to introduce by way of regulations. I urge the SNP to support our amendment, to undertake a business and regulatory impact assessment, and to take time to reflect before pushing ahead with the bill.

19. To ask the Scottish Executive which national health service boards do not employ or contract pathologists in their own area who are qualified to conduct NHS or procurator fiscal post mortems. (S4O-01177)

Since the death of North Lanarkshire’s only specialist pathologist, all post mortems are now being dealt with in Glasgow. It has been reported that bereaved families in Lanarkshire now have to wait up to three weeks to bury their loved ones. That is a major concern for people at a very stressful time. Will the cabinet secretary please look at the situation with a view to ensuring that it is properly addressed?

16. To ask the Scottish Executive what legal advice the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning has received regarding charging management fees for non-United Kingdom European Union students. (S4O-01084)

Can the cabinet secretary tell me whether the solution to the EU students issue will involve Scottish students paying a fee or levy of any description?

I thank the Conservative Party for bringing the subject for debate. Although I share some common ground with them on the principles that they are promoting, I dare say that we would diverge in how we put those principles into practice. The Tories’ contribution can be viewed in the context of the Localism Act 2011 and in line with the coalition statement: “The time has come to disperse power more widely in Britain today”. In my book, that should mean listening to the millions, not the millionaires. It should mean giving more power to ordinary folk, to local communities and to the workers’ and civic organisations that represent thousands and sometimes millions of people. It should mean giving a clear message to the Murdochs, the Soutars and the Trumps of this world that, in a democracy, their views do not count for more than those of anyone else. Sadly, there are many examples to show that that is not how the world works. Having a Government at Westminster whose Cabinet is overwhelmingly composed of ex-public school millionaires hardly fills us with confidence that their ideas for extending local democracy have much connection with the man in the street, however much they may try to be like the common people. In Scotland, is it right that millionaires think that their money can allow them to ride roughshod over local people, to hold our energy policy to ransom or to bankroll one side of a referendum on the future of our country? Localism should be about the extension of democracy and giving real powers to communities and local authorities, not making funding dependent on submission to the programme of central Government nor restricting local government funding powers nor having local government shoulder 10 times the cuts burden of the rest of the Scottish budget.

It is clear to local authorities that the minister is making swingeing cuts to their budgets. The Scottish Government comes across as backing devolution to the limits and beyond, but in practice it draws power to itself or to arm’s-length bodies, which are conveniently lacking in accountability to the Scottish Government when difficult and unpopular decisions are made. The Government is quite willing to deliver and take credit for good news, but it is loth to mention anything bad, unless it can blame Westminster or local government. Devolution is not just about more power for SNP ministers. The Government should follow the logic of devolution and give more power to local authorities. After all, the principle of subsidiarity is enshrined in European Union law. The idea is that decision making should be decentralised as far as possible, although it is acknowledged that some decisions are better taken at UK or European level, because of their scale or effects—I can see why separatists are not keen on that.

No. Local democracy should not be about making all local issues subservient to the quest for the holy grail of independence, however independence is defined. Working in partnership with the Scottish Government should not be about local government and communities doing what they are told. There should be constructive dialogue, not meek acceptance and a refusal to rock the referendum boat. Local government can be a force to be reckoned with when it achieves advances on its own terms, based on local knowledge. For example, in the North Lanarkshire Council area, Labour will fund 5,000 jobs through a wage subsidy scheme, set up an employment commission to harness resources from the private, public and third sectors and create jobs, and finalise arrangements to attract resources for the creation of a new town at the Ravenscraig site. Labour will also support town centres, build 1,000 new homes, provide new kitchens and bathrooms, deal with antisocial residents and continue to improve schools. Labour will deliver in that regard despite £100 million of cuts in council funding during the next three years. It gets worse: local authorities must find £17 million to make up for the £40 million cut in council tax benefit, and there is no guarantee that councils will not have to pick up the whole bill in future. Public transport fares are rising and services are under attack as a result of reductions in the bus service operators grant. Bus regulation might help, but no doubt it would upset some bus operators. Police services are to be centralised, but is that a cost saving that will come at the expense of accountability? Localism should be about local people getting together and having power to influence what happens in their communities. It should be about central Government and local government listening to people and working in partnership with them. It should be about understanding communities’ ambitions and aspirations and giving people the tools to help to realise them. The Scottish Government should learn to give power away instead of asking for more all the time.

I do not think that this debate will generate many headlines in tomorrow’s papers, although it should, because it is a high-voltage debate. Over £2 billion is spent every year on energy transmission through our grids. We need huge investment to ensure the future security of our supply. Project transmit’s predecessor—project discovery—concluded that £200 billion needed to be spent on energy infrastructure over the next 10 years. A big chunk of that will be for Scottish infrastructure. Project transmit is about ensuring that the industry delivers the pipes and wires that we need in a way that supports our economic, environmental and social objectives. The project also needs to take a broad view that encompasses the development of European and other international energy grid networks. The nature of the charging regime is also a fundamental factor in how our energy policy develops because it can make or break the development of energy supplies from new sources and locations, and it can help or hinder our attempts to eliminate fuel poverty, fight climate change and promote economic growth that is based on low carbon technology and power sources. In determining charges for transmission, we clearly need to take into account the physical costs of infrastructure. However, we also need to ensure that the way in which we determine charges allows for the development timescale and nature of new energy sources. Tackling climate change is a long-term challenge. We should ensure that entry to the market is not restricted by short-term considerations. Project transmit is addressing those issues. It seeks to harmonise the grid charging regime with generation policy and it should deliver lower transmission costs. However, as Ken Macintosh noted, issues remain with island costs. That is particularly important for Scotland, not only because we have many islands and people who live on them, but because our islands have enormous potential for developing renewable energy production. Transmission charges are crucial to the future of our island economies. The existing charging regime—ICRP—has influenced the market and has in general worked against the development of renewables through measures such as higher transmission charges for Scottish suppliers. There are of course pros and cons for all the alternatives, which include uniform charging—also called postage stamp or socialised charging—and various cost-reflective methods, such as the improved ICRP that has been considered under project transmit. The alternatives would have different impacts on our policy objectives. Uniform charging might benefit renewables at the expense of carbon capture and, as the Conservative amendment notes, it could also be detrimental to the most vulnerable. Improved ICRP would be a big improvement on the existing system and, with political will, many of the issues that it raises could be addressed. Our amendment suggests that the review of renewables obligation certificates should prioritise community renewables and take account of the remaining disparity in grid access costs under the improved ICRP. On island charges, I note that Fergus Ewing blogged earlier this year that “It is good that Ofgem is listening to Scotland. Working together with Ofgem, with Scottish industry and with island communities, we must find a solution.” The minister must do that—please do.

When the proposal to set up the Scottish Tribunals Service was debated in September 2010—there was the same glamour then as there has been in the debate so far—I am reliably informed that there was a remarkable degree of parliamentary agreement, both in voting and in the points that were made. I will continue on that consensual theme, so I apologise if what I will say sounds familiar. In 2010, everyone agreed that justice that is delivered by tribunals is an integral part of the Scottish justice system, that we should create an integrated tribunals service, that any transfer of powers should seek to preserve the benefits of existing arrangements, and that there should be wide consultation. It was noted that developments at UK level, with the creation, for the UK, of the Tribunals Service were in danger of leaving Scotland suffering by comparison, with tribunals that deal with devolved matters providing an inferior level of service to users. Although everyone was keen that we be not left behind, some concerns were expressed—notably about how the tribunal system sits organisationally with regard to the Scottish Court Service, given the significant differences in how they operate. The timescale for implementation and adequate consultation was also an issue. We are now entering a period of consultation on the further proposals from the Scottish Government. It is important to preserve the valuable role of tribunals, which combines their specialist knowledge and understanding with their operation as a less formal and less adversarial arena for justice than the court system. Although there is no doubt that the tribunal system that we have inherited is complex and could benefit from a more consistent approach, we must balance measures to address that with the need to maintain the tribunals’ strengths, including their accessibility. Affordability should not be a barrier to justice. We must be aware, while we seek to adopt a standardised packaging for tribunals, that their contents vary, and we should not discard important ingredients. We must ensure that the process of simplification and standardisation of procedures does not undermine specialised elements that are of value in particular tribunal areas. The reduction of overlaps and the elimination of duplication are worth while, as long as they are genuine overlap and duplication, and as long as elimination does not involve putting square pegs in round holes, which would not be the way to ensure better deployment and sharing of resources. We need to be able to maintain important specialisation in appointments and support structures. I am therefore pleased that the consultation document is careful to make it clear that a coherent system does not mean a one-size-fits-all system. That is, of course, easier to say than it is to achieve, particularly with 40 tribunals that deal with thousands of cases between them. As the consultation document recognises, the key objectives are not necessarily mutually compatible in all respects. An emphasis on, or priority for one objective may make others more difficult to achieve. Specialisation has already been mentioned as an issue that is likely to arise in pursuing a streamlined service. There are also potential conflicts between safeguarding the interests of users and pursuing greater administrative efficiency. Even within each one of the stated key objectives, there is room for divergence. Securing just and speedy outcomes sounds good, and it certainly does not serve the cause of justice to allow cases to drag on—but neither does excessive haste. For those reasons, it is right that the statutory framework be for evolutionary change. Tribunals must be allowed to address their individual issues and requirements, and to integrate to an extent and at a speed that preserves their advantages and ensures the optimal balance in applying the key objectives. I note that the consultation covers only the devolved aspects of the tribunal integration. However, given that such integration is taking place in England and Wales, and that it has been suggested by the UK Ministry of Justice and others that there could be a transfer of powers for reserved tribunal administration and the judiciary to Scotland, I take this opportunity to support the principle of such a move.

4. To ask the Scottish Executive what the total actual reduction in CO2 tonnage has been from projects receiving grants from the climate challenge fund. (S4O-00832)

Has the minister stopped using the total that is based on estimates for projects, some of which have produced little or no actual savings, despite contributing hundreds of thousands of tonnes to the figures that have been quoted by the First Minister and others?

As we have heard, the Remploy factory in Motherwell is among those that it is proposed will close. It provides storage and packing services, and employs 22 people. The factory is, in fact, in Wishaw, but getting its location wrong should be the least of our worries. The major worry will be finding another job in an area that has already been hit hard by unemployment. It should be noted with great disappointment that only 8 per cent of the staff who have previously been made redundant from Remploy have since found employment. In Motherwell and Wishaw, there are 22 jobseekers for every vacancy, which is more than three times the national average. Unemployment is more than 50 per cent higher than the Scottish average. The 22 new jobseekers will be competing in one of the toughest job markets in the country, and the experts tell us that it will get tougher. Naturally, employees are not optimistic. Linda Hills, who has worked at Remploy for 27 years, said: “We are being told we’re not wanted. We’ve always wanted to work, not claim benefits. I can’t get on with my normal life because I keep on worrying about what the future will hold.” The First Minister has described the decision as “at best, ill-timed and insensitive.”—[Official Report, 8 March 2012; c 7069.] I think that he was being too kind to the coalition and the relevant UK minister, who announced the decision in answer to a parliamentary question, leaving my colleague Frank Roy MP to pass on the news to the workers in our constituency. I gather that the Scottish Government was told before the announcement, but I presume that, at that stage, it was too late for its discussions with the DWP to make a difference. The trade unions have not given up the fight, and I hope that the Scottish Government will do what it can to protect the provision of supported employment. Community, Unite and the GMB all have workers in Remploy factories. They are all working together, lobbying hard for the retention of Remploy workplaces. Community believes that there is a future for supported employment factories but that it requires the right political will. It wants the Government to target resources on the search for new owners and the creation of new business models. The GMB points to the need for disabled people to be allowed to manage and fully contribute to the organisation and cites the fact that that has not happened as the main reason why Remploy has continued to fail over the past 10 years. Another reason that has been cited for Remploy’s difficulties is the lack of orders. That is not inevitable. More could be done—for example, use could be made of article 19 of the EU public sector procurement directive, which permits contracts to be reserved for social enterprises that employ a majority of workers with disabilities. There are a few, including lain Duncan Smith, who have the cheek to claim that closure is a progressive solution and who portray Remploy as some sort of workhouse from a past century. In truth, that is nothing but a smokescreen for the callous, cut-and-be-damned austerity agenda. I am sure that some factories could benefit from investment, but many have sophisticated machinery that produces quality products.

I think that Ken Macintosh has already answered that point. Nobody would recognise the Remploy factories in their caricature as a Victorian institution. Of course, more recent initiatives aim to support people into mainstream employment and, for those who can take advantage of such schemes, they are welcome developments whose costs make them attractive to Government. However, that does not make Remploy an outmoded model. Unfortunately, many employers are still reluctant to employ people with disabilities and the supported workplace still has a valuable role to play for many workers. Indeed, there is a strong argument for developing more social enterprises staffed and run by disabled workers. To survive, that might be the way that Remploy workplaces must go. It might not be possible to save all workplaces, but while we fight to keep the existing workplaces open we must consider alternative means of providing and developing supported employment. I know that, in my area, North Lanarkshire Council already provides supported employment for 140 people, and will offer support through the North Lanarkshire’s Working scheme to those whose jobs are now at risk. The council has already said that it will consider the expansion of its operations. One of those, Beltane Products, is a sheltered workshop, currently providing work for 23 people. Formed nearly 50 years ago, it refurbishes and manufactures a range of furniture and furnishings. The aim would be to expand along the lines of the existing and very successful partnership between Glasgow’s City Building, the RNIB and Blindcraft, which helps to protect 260 jobs. I hope that the Scottish Government can extend support for such action by local authorities and social enterprises through procurement and other initiatives.

The Scottish Government could also ask questions of the UK Government, such as what will happen to Remploy’s assets—will they be sold and, if so, where will the profits go? Perhaps the Scottish Government could lobby for the equipment, facilities and land—

Instead of the cuts, could we be making better use of the money and resources for the benefit of disabled people? That could be a progressive—

5. To ask the Scottish Executive how many landlords have been fined for (a) failing to register and (b) not notifying local authorities of the appointment of an agent since 31 August 2011 and how much has been imposed in fines. (S4O-00793)

Many of my constituents are concerned about the difficulties that are caused by landlords who allow their properties, grounds and tenants to blight the community. Unregistered landlords make the situation worse. At present, housing benefit rules do not require their registration. Will the Scottish Government consider measures in the housing benefit system to ensure registration of landlords?

I declare that I am still a councillor with North Lanarkshire Council. This money has been trumpeted as a good news story, but it has just been used as a carrot and stick to ensure that local authorities apply the council tax freeze. They had little choice other than to do what they were told. I and many others—including, I suspect, those SNP members who are still sitting councillors—believe that the local government settlement is grossly unfair and unjust, putting most of the burden of Scottish Government cuts on local authorities.

No. However, as James Kelly said, we will not vote against what is on offer, because local authorities already face significant cuts and need all the money that they can get, even if it has strings attached.

No. Unlike what my party pledged to provide, this is definitely not a fully funded council tax freeze—rather, it is an underfunded council service squeeze. I recognise that the Scottish Government has less money to share out, thanks to the Con-Demolition of our finances, but the sharing of what is available is anything but fair. John Mason (Glasgow Shettleston) (SNP) rose— Within the shrinking Scottish Government pot, local government funding is shrinking faster than other funding, and the amendment order does little to address that. The amounts of money have been disputed, but the reality is that more than 80 per cent of the cuts will still be shouldered by local government. Kevin Stewart rose— Over the next three years, local government’s share of the Scottish budget will drop from 34.5 to 33.3 per cent. More than £1.5 billion is being taken away from councils, with nearly £900 million being taken away as a result of the cuts being above average. While the Scottish Government’s real-terms funding has dropped by 2.2 per cent, local government is losing 5.5 per cent of its real-terms funding. The rest of the Scottish budget is down by just 0.5 per cent. The Scottish Government expects local government—which we all depend on to deliver high-quality services—to shoulder 10 times the level of cuts that will apply elsewhere. So much for the Scottish Government and the new local government minister valuing the importance of local government. What could local authorities have done with the money that they would have had, had the cuts been shared more equally? They could have increased support to the voluntary sector. They could have created more employment and job security. From the Highlands to the Borders, many more houses could have been built and many services, and the jobs of those who provide them, could have been protected. John Mason rose—

From the Western Isles to Fife, instead of standards being lowered and services reduced, services such as street cleaning and education could have been protected. The Scottish Government might not like to admit it, but it has failed local authorities and their employees. It has failed those who are dependent on the quality services that are delivered by local authorities. It has failed to recognise that, rather than job losses—particularly among women—jobs could have been protected. It has failed to recognise that there could have been a pay award rather than a pay freeze. Most disappointingly, it has failed to recognise that it did not have to be this way. To borrow a line from the Scottish Trades Union Congress, there is a better way.

When we speak near the end of a debate, we become very aware that most of what we wanted to say has been said. However, hearing comments again in a debate such as this is important. If we are serious about tackling poverty, we should be equally committed to the living wage, for it is designed and calculated to take people out of poverty. I congratulate all those who have been instrumental in bringing the campaign to the current stage, including the Poverty Alliance Scotland, the Scottish Trades Union Congress, the trade unions and the councils—notably Glasgow City Council. I am pleased that North Lanarkshire Council has now endorsed payment of the living wage to its employees. In the spirit of consensus, I am pleased that even David Cameron has recognised that it is “an idea whose time has come”. The living wage is not a new idea. As many members know, we can claim that a Scot had a hand in its evolution more than 200 years ago, when Adam Smith wrote in “The Wealth of Nations” that workers “should have such a share of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves tolerably well fed, clothed, and lodged.” Those words are quite close to the modern concept. For families whose wage earners are paid less than the living wage, it is difficult—if not impossible—to provide basic essentials without working excessively long hours or taking on unsustainable debt. Of course, the justification for the living wage goes beyond basic needs. For example, as Save the Children has pointed out, in-work poverty and low pay, particularly among women, contribute to the high level of child poverty in Scotland. Those who fear that bringing in the living wage would create unemployment should remember that that argument was also used against the minimum wage, but the relationship between wage levels and income is not so simple. At the bottom end of the wage scale, raising income has many impacts—through factors such as greater work satisfaction, improved quality and productivity, less absenteeism and increased local spending—that can offset the higher wage costs and boost employment. The old adage that the poor work harder if they are paid less and the rich work harder if they are paid more is clearly a myth that rich people have propagated. We should remember that the warnings of dire consequences and lengthening dole queues proved to be unfounded when the minimum wage was brought in. The opposite was true—employment continued to grow. Many people who understood why that would happen with a minimum wage that was set at the right level were of the opinion that the minimum wage had been set cautiously’ if anything, it was set below the level that would give the economy the optimal benefits. To those who argue that the living wage distorts the labour market, I say that we need the living wage to protect people from the ravages of a labour market that uses high unemployment to drive wages down to poverty levels. I hope that, after all the failures of unrestrained markets, we have learned that free markets are not the solution to every problem. The quality of people’s lives should not be at the whim of market forces. Our society recognises that, and the state steps in to support those whom the labour market squeezes and spits out. Is it not better to protect people’s ability to keep themselves out of poverty than to adopt a laissez-faire attitude and have to deal with the consequences? We must take a broader view and consider the wider benefits to the economy and people’s lives. Let’s face it—putting a few extra quid in the pockets of the poorest members of our society is likely to do more for the local economy than boosting the bonuses and offshore bank accounts of the better off. It is estimated that local businesses will get an extra £1.63 for every £1 that is paid to provide a living wage. Reductions in poverty and inequality also have many longer-term benefits, from better physical and mental health to lower rates of crime and antisocial behaviour. The living wage is proposed for the public sector, but I hope that it will be taken up more widely. It is indeed an idea whose time has come, as witnessed by cities and countries all over the world that have adopted the idea. It is not the whole answer, however, and the degree of its success will depend on action to address poverty traps in the tax and benefits system. Like other objectives, such as increased numbers of apprenticeships and the promotion of measures to tackle climate change, payment of the living wage could be incorporated into procurement procedures. As John Park does, I hope that the new Minister for Local Government and Planning and the Scottish Government will support the creation of a Scottish living wage unit, as called for by the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations and trade unions, to increase the impetus for wider introduction of the living wage. Finally, just to make the score one each, I put it on the record that North Lanarkshire Council’s employees would not be receiving the living wage if the SNP’s alternative budget had been successful.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive whether permitting or promoting payment to housing association board and committee members were intended consequences of the repeal of schedule 7 to the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001. (S4O-00702)

If that was the intention, neither the Scottish Parliament information centre nor the housing associations to which I have spoken are aware of it. Where is that indicated? The Scottish Housing Regulator seems to think that it must bring in payments because it cannot go against what it sees as the will of Parliament. I do not think that MSPs were aware that that would be a consequence. Should not such a fundamental change be discussed by Parliament to clarify whether it is our will?

Will the member join me in congratulating North Lanarkshire Council on its plan to boost to 5,000 over the next three years the number of people who are supported into work by the North Lanarkshire Council partnership? Of those people, 80 per cent are young people.

I have been informed that one bid in relation to the Forth crossing included the supply of steel by Tata from the Dalzell plant in Motherwell. That would have been a major boost for employment in my constituency and in Lanarkshire, and for Scotland’s steel industry. Will the First Minister therefore explain why Transport Scotland has said that no Scottish firms were involved? Will he meet Tata’s chief executive to discuss the Scottish steel industry’s role?

Like other members, I thank Patricia Ferguson. I also thank the Motherwell Times for its campaign on the issue. I support the motion on Glasgow’s threatened rail stations. The list in which those stations appear, on the basis that they are within a mile of another station, includes the Airbles and Motherwell stations in my constituency. The case for the retention of Airbles station is very similar to the case for retaining the Glasgow stations—there is common cause in the argument for the retention of all the stations. Annual footfall at Airbles is more than 100,000. Built in 1989, the station has gone from strength to strength, providing a convenient alternative to the even busier Motherwell station. Airbles station is handy for commuters, football fans, local communities and many others. Convenience is key to the argument for retaining Airbles station and the Glasgow stations. I presume that we all agree that we need to increase the use of public transport. When we consider the benefits of public transport, we do not just look, as Beeching did, at the bottom line of the balance sheet for the service in question. We must also consider the wider social, economic and environmental benefits. We do not just look at where we are now but at where we want to be—we want increased use of public transport—and how to get there. I am sure that the minister will agree that the best way to get there is not by closing stations—or am I wrong and, half a century on, has the ghost of Beeching returned to stop the SNP promoting the reshaping of Scottish railways? If so, I ask the SNP to learn the lessons of the past and look to the future. I thank the minister for his recent reply to my written question on the “Rail 2014” consultation. I noticed some omissions—according to Google maps—from the list of all stations that are within a mile of another station. That apart, the answer was useful.

I will come to that later. The minister’s response noted that the stations were selected on the basis of a footfall of less than a 120,000. No justification for that cut-off has been given; indeed, the figure was not mentioned in the consultation or the fact sheet, which provides the list of affected stations at the request of unnamed stakeholders. Does the minister understand the great uncertainty that the review has created in the communities involved? Petitions launched in my area have already been signed by hundreds of my constituents, many of whom commute to Glasgow from Airbles and Motherwell; doubtless, some reach their final destinations courtesy of some of the other stations highlighted for “consideration” by the consultation. My constituents could be about to suffer the double whammy of station closures at both ends of their journey. My party has been responsible for the reopening of lines such as the Airdrie to Bathgate line. New stations have been opened, and each time that has been justified. We should beware of the false economy of saving now and paying in other ways for years to come. The minister has said that the Government has no plans for closure. Why, then, have a consultation to discuss closures? We are told that it is Transport Scotland’s doing. It is tempting to have an arm’s-length organisation that can take the blame, but come on. I suggest that the minister try something different and take responsibility for bodies that are ultimately answerable to him. He should not just say “no plans”; he should say “no”.

I know of no one who would dissent from the view that “local democracy and ... this year’s local elections” are important. I certainly would not; however, in agreeing, I must declare an interest as a North Lanarkshire councillor who will stand down in May. There is also no question but that the 2007 election brought local and Scottish democracy into disrepute on a number of counts and that the lessons that have been drawn in the Gould report and elsewhere have, in most respects, been learned. Nor is there any doubt that subsequent “improvements ... in electoral administration” are welcome. Clearly we all welcome the work on providing a robust system of electronic counting for the elections and want a successfully run election with a high turnout. However, the final section of the Scottish Government motion is not really about local government elections. That is just as well, because if the motion had any real relevance to that issue, I would be drawing the chamber’s attention to Gould’s criticism of the lateness of consideration of arrangements for 2007 and his recommendation that such matters should have been sorted out long before. In this debate on local government elections, we should not muddy the waters by discussing the Scottish Parliament elections that will take place in four years’ time or the administration of a referendum 1,000 days away. Instead, we should give proper consideration to ensuring that the local government elections are—and are seen to be—fair and above board. I believe that that is best done through the good offices of the Electoral Commission. We might all agree on the importance of local democracy, but it could be said that some have a funny way of showing it. I do not think that local democracy is well served by current Scottish Government policies. On funding, which has already been mentioned, recent figures from the Scottish Parliament information centre show that, within a shrinking Scottish Government pot, local government funding is shrinking faster than everything else.

No—I am moving on. This year, 34.5 per cent of the Scottish Government budget will go to local government; next year, the figure drops to 33.9 per cent; and the year after—2013-14—it will fall again to 33.2 per cent. Over a three-year period when total funding will drop by 2.4 per cent, local government funding will drop by a massive 5.9 per cent. What happens to the rest of the Scottish Government budget when we take out local government funding? With the rest of the budget taking an increasing share, it drops by only 0.6 per cent.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. For the next two years, the Scottish Government expects local government to shoulder 10 times the level of cuts that will apply elsewhere. In 2014-15, the cuts are smaller and more even, but already the damage is done, so the cumulative impact of that squeeze on local government is that it will always be £1 billion worse off than if its budget share had been maintained to 2015—and, of course, that figure would be higher still if one compared the position had the budget been maintained in real terms. So much for valuing the importance of local government. Support for local democracy should also mean working with local authorities to tackle issues such as high unemployment and ensuring that Scottish policy supports local action. Why, then, do areas such as North Lanarkshire not feature in initiatives such as new enterprise zones? That is a double blow for North Lanarkshire, as the BioCity life sciences—

I will take your words of wisdom, Presiding Officer. Local democracy is important. So is holding the Scottish Government to account for what it does to local government. The verdict on local government’s performance will, I hope, be delivered through smoothly run elections in May. The verdict on the Scottish Government may be reflected in that result too.

To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Housing and Transport last met the Scottish Housing Regulator—

Sorry.

5. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Minister for Housing and Transport last met the Scottish Housing Regulator and what was discussed. (S4O-00543)

Is the minister aware that housing associations, tenants organisations and others have expressed great concern about the proposals to restrict people from standing for election and to introduce payments for board members? I am sure that those concerns will have been expressed at the consultation events, although only the regulator’s presentations and speeches have been published. Will the minister ensure that a record of the responses that were made at those events will also be published and that all views expressed will be taken into account?

Unfortunately, Mr Swinney’s motion follows the usual Scottish Government mantra: UK, bad, Scotland, good. However, to be fair, it would not be too hard to portray the current state of affairs in that way, because the Tory-Liberal coalition’s handling of the UK economy has been so bad that—dare I say it?—it makes even the current Scottish Government’s policies look good by comparison. The coalition insists that it is dealing with problems that the previous Government created, which conveniently downplays the part played by the greedy and incompetent bankers at home and abroad.

No, I want to move on. Meanwhile, the Scottish Government is torn between criticising the Tories and joining them in peddling the myths about the nature of our economic problems. The coalition’s entire economic strategy has been built on myths. There is the myth that British public debt, which is currently about 80 per cent of GDP, is at an unprecedented and unsustainable level, when in reality it is similar to that of many other developed nations and considerably less than that of some.

No, I want to move on. It is right to be concerned about the level of debt, but hysterical and excessive responses are counterproductive and have given rise to the further myth that we need to slash hard and deep, which just destroys our ability to generate the wealth with which to repay debt. That myth is reinforced by the myth that public finances are out of control and public services waste money. The real waste is ditching services for the sake of a slash-and-burn ideology. As Glenn O’Hara of the Oxford Brookes University notes, “Recent history repeatedly shows that the combination of background inflation, resurgent growth and the establishment of a sound plateau for public spending are actually much more likely to be effective over the medium term.” Perhaps George Osborne should go back to Oxford to learn the lessons of history. His misdiagnoses and flawed prescriptions have hindered recovery. There are some signs in the autumn statement, however, that the chancellor has got a fright. Perhaps the OBR’s analysis has made him think again. If so, maybe our Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth could benefit from having an OBR in Scotland. Alongside the downwards revision of growth expectations, George Osborne has decided to take a small step away from disaster. He is trying to stimulate growth by investing in infrastructure, although by far less than he cut, and by making business borrowing easier, although he is not tackling bankers head on—even action on bonuses has been abandoned. Sadly, the abandonment of child tax credit rises and other measures will make low to middle-income families worse off and increase child poverty. The continuing negativity of the Government also depresses consumer and business confidence, making it even harder for business to grow. George Osborne somehow fails to grasp that confidence matters when it comes to growth and that he needs to stimulate both. The OBR report makes it clear that, because of the chancellor’s low-growth policies, borrowing will be much higher than that projected under the previous Government and much higher than the chancellor predicted. Mr Osborne’s answer to the failure of his austerity programme is more austerity and making the public sector pay for the bankers’ mistakes. The Scottish Government, too, is critical of cuts, such as those in public sector pensions, but when SNP members had the opportunity to do something, what did they do? They passed on the cuts. They were notable by their absence from the picket lines during the recent strike, and their solidarity with and support for public sector workers stops with criticism of the UK Government. Teachers, hospital workers, refuse collectors and dinner ladies were not the cause of the financial crisis; bankers were. However, while plans to tax and trim the casino bankers’ bonuses are abandoned, public sector workers are being made to pay for the consequences of the bankers’ mistakes. On the one hand, the Scottish Government has been critical of the Con-Dems but, on the other hand, it is aiding and abetting them with its own additional cuts agenda. There has been a 20 per cent cut in funding for colleges, a £319 million cut in real terms to the national health service budget and a 50 per cent cut to the social housing budget. In addition, there is very little to show for the Scottish Government’s spending on jobs and the economy, with 100,000 young people unemployed and no overall reduction in child poverty since 2007. Perhaps the Scottish Government’s mantra might more accurately be: UK Government bad, Scottish Government not so good.

Although we are all concerned about the dire state of house building, I think that we begin to part company over what should be done about the situation. I believe that there is significant and unaddressed demand for social rented housing and shared equity schemes, but both are dependent on Government support that is rapidly shrinking. The housing and regeneration budget will be reduced from nearly £400 million to little over £250 million in 2014, which is a cut of more than 35 per cent. Next year, the affordable housing supply budget is to suffer an even more drastic cut of 53 per cent, falling from just over £268 million to as little as £125 million. Of course, some of the affordable housing budget is included in the local government settlement but it, too, will be under severe pressure. Manifesto promises and the requirement in the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 to eradicate fuel poverty by 2016 are unlikely to be met. The pledge to build 6,000 social rented homes each year has become a pledge to build 6,000 affordable homes, just over 4,000 of which will be social rented homes. That is nowhere near enough to meet demand; Scotland needs 10,000 new affordable homes a year. The 60 per cent decrease in the money for building affordable homes will be achieved by limiting the subsidy to a maximum of £40,000 per unit, but it remains to be seen whether that subsidy will be raised for areas of greater need. Unless it is relaxed, the limit will make it difficult to fund social rented accommodation in areas of high deprivation; if it is relaxed, there will not be enough money to fund the building of as many houses. The 1,000 intermediate rented homes, available through the national housing trust, are by definition affordable only for some. They are out of reach of the poorest tenants. Another 1,000 are to come from subsidised home ownership. I support the continuation of the open market and the new supply schemes, but I note that the Scottish Government is still not providing funding for the open market scheme. That scheme was assessed as being the best to meet particular needs—for example, the needs of people with a disability—and also as being a particularly cost-effective option. However, it is now available only for a very limited number of homes that are already in the process of being built. I am also concerned about the future of social housing under the new regime of the housing regulator, which has brought forward proposals that will undermine the role of local residents on the boards and committees of registered social landlords. I am sure that there is no great demand for those proposals from housing associations and residents. In accordance with the tenant consultation and satisfaction principles of the Scottish housing charter, their views should be paramount. Any attempt to impose those new rules will be an attack on local democracy. It will not be acceptable for the Scottish Government to wash its hands and say, “It wisnae me. It was that quango what done it.” The Government must take responsibility, and not give it away to organisations that it then blames when things go wrong. Instead of trying to fix things that are not broken, the Government should address real problems—such as factors who are withdrawing their services because absentee landlords make their task so difficult. Instead of attacking social landlords, how about the Government giving local government more powers to deal with antisocial landlords?

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what plans it has to protect and improve animal welfare. (S4O-00379)

I remind the minister that, over four years ago, he promised to introduce within two years secondary legislation that dealt with pet dealers, animal sanctuaries, travelling circuses, electric shock collars, pet vending and livery yards, and in the following two years secondary legislation that dealt with riding establishments, cat and dog boarding, dog breeding, the sale of dogs and performing animals. As far as I know, only pet dealer regulations have been introduced. When will the minister address the backlog of animal welfare issues?

7. To ask the Scottish Executive what analysis it has made of the impact of the proposed increases in non-domestic rates on investment, jobs and output for businesses and on inward investment. (S4O-00344)

Further to the discussion of the matter that took place at the Finance Committee on Monday, I am aware that the cabinet secretary has a robust and optimistic faith in his own predictions that is based on his self-monitored past performance. However, I would prefer something a little more rigorous, particularly when his prediction is based on assumptions about the growth of new businesses. The non-domestic rates increases will make life more difficult for new and existing enterprises—

—at a time when even major high street companies are having their rents reduced to £1 a year to avoid empty properties. Although it is always good to look on the bright side of life—

—does the cabinet secretary not agree that we need an independent formal modelling of non-domestic rates income, and does he have a contingency plan to raise revenue or cut spending if the business rates do not deliver?

11. To ask the Scottish Executive when the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning last met college principals and chairs and what was discussed. (S4O-00318)

I thank the cabinet secretary again for that information. I am sure that the meeting that the cabinet secretary mentioned will have drawn to his attention the fact that many colleges are located in, and serve students from, areas of high unemployment and deprivation, in which the proportion of school pupils who go on to university can be as low as 5 per cent. Does he accept that this year’s large 10 per cent cut in college budgets, which is to be followed by a huge 20 per cent cut next year, is a severe blow that falls far more heavily on those areas?

Liz Smith said that the motion was “benign” and “bland”. Indeed, it has been suggested to me that it was computer-generated from a data bank of warm but woolly stock phrases. Who could argue with prioritising attainment, improving young people’s life chances, “giving them the best start” to enable them to make “progress at school”; recognising success; and improving “competitiveness and ... opportunity”? All that is missing is a reference to apple pie and cream. What happened to the promises of concerted and definitive action on, for example, reducing primary class sizes? In her opening speech, the minister stood tall over her statement that class sizes are at a record low. However, I am sure she will agree that that record low is nowhere near the class size of 18 that was first promised to all Scotland’s children.

No. I want to make progress. I was also interested in the use of the phrase “rich attainment” in the motion. If members Google it, they will find that among the few results that come up those that are relevant to education mostly concern the impact of inequality, and point out that, for the rich, attainment is always greater. That might not be what those who drafted the motion wanted to refer to, but it is very true. One of the main influences on a child’s chances of going to university is where they live. Since 1999, there have been some improvements; for example, the number of state-school pupils who are going to university has increased from 31 per cent to 35.7 per cent. However, for schools in deprived areas, that figure is often in single digits, while for schools in nearby better-off areas it can be over 40 per cent. Although Labour’s schools of ambition programme was addressing the issue and raising aspirations with clear measurable results, it was unfortunately not given the time that it needed to maximise its impact. Given that this deep-rooted problem cannot be tackled overnight and requires a long-term programme of action that is supported to fruition, it is a great pity that the Scottish National Party cancelled that initiative. The cabinet secretary, Mike Russell, has recognised that progress has been made in the past 10 years. However, it is still the case that only 15 per cent of Scottish students come from our 20 per cent most-deprived areas. Mr Russell has declared that that inequality of opportunity must be tackled; he thinks that his post-16 reforms will somehow do the job. Statutory duties on universities to address imbalances smack not only of trying to shut the stable door after the horse has bolted, but of passing the buck. As far as post-16 resources are concerned, there is an educational divide, and far from addressing the problem, the Scottish Government is making it worse. Deprived areas may not supply as many university students, and that makes the college sector even more important to them. The college sector now faces 20 per cent cuts, on top of 10 per cent cuts last year. Will that do wonders for attainment? I think not. There will be fewer courses and students. How will that improve young people’s life chances? What a way to recognise the work of the likes of Motherwell College, which has a great record of success. Even if Mike Russell does not force colleges to merge, how will struggling colleges cope with the impact of cuts on staff, students and courses without doing so? Is that what is meant by “improved competitiveness and ... opportunity”? Alongside the problems of deprivation, we have groups that are particularly affected by barriers to education and employment. I am pleased to note the work that Motherwell College has been doing in conjunction with STV local and Action for Children, helping and encouraging young carers to take courses and explore careers. Young disabled people also face obstacles. I note the finding in a report by Leonard Cheshire Disability that 40 per cent of young disabled people have been turned down or discouraged from progressing into further education, while 42 per cent do not undertake work experience. To tackle poverty and provide employment opportunities for all, educational inequality must be addressed. We need to help all schools to be good schools, and we need to help all children to realise their potential, but we cannot do that without action that is targeted at the areas of greatest need—not in a “Here today, gone tomorrow” fashion, but with a serious long-term commitment to tackling the underlying causes of such problems. What we have, however, is a chasm between the Scottish Government's rhetoric and reality. The reality does not raise aspirations and ambitions for all, does not provide the best start for all, and does not give the same opportunities to all. Our children and young people deserve better. I say to the minister that it is time we had an education system that is fit for the 21st century, an education system that equips young people with the employability skills that they need to meet the challenges of the modern world, and an education system that does not condemn the life chances of those who find themselves in the wrong postcode area.

1. To ask the Scottish Executive what meetings the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs has had with the directors of the national museums and galleries in the last month. (S4O-00278)

I note the cabinet secretary’s support for free access to museums and acknowledge the view of museums and galleries that such a policy would be changed only as a last resort. However, I also note that this year the budget for the national museums and galleries is going to be cut by more than £9 million in real terms, and that the museums and galleries have made it clear that they will find it extremely difficult to stay within their budgets without introducing charges. In the light of her comment this week that there is very little flexibility in the culture budget, is the cabinet secretary able to guarantee that such charges will not be introduced? If charges are not introduced, what cuts will have to be made to museums and galleries?

There is not enough detail in the spending review to see exactly how much money will be spent on housing. Some 40 per cent of the budget for new affordable homes is included in the local government settlement. However, the actual amount is unclear from budget documents, although the Minister for Housing and Transport has said that it is likely to be £250 million over three years. There are significant question marks over the ability of councils to meet their commitments with shrinking budgets, but what we can see makes it clear that the Scottish Government will struggle to meet a range of housing objectives. We really need level 4 figures to see just how badly the Scottish Government is doing at keeping its manifesto promises and meeting its commitments under existing legislation, such as the requirement under the Housing (Scotland) Act 2001 to eradicate fuel poverty by 2016. Energy Action Scotland estimates that meeting that target will require a total investment of around £200 million in each year of this session of Parliament, and yet the Government’s spending on energy efficiency reduced this year and the spending review gives only £200 million over the next three years for domestic energy efficiency and fuel poverty. It looks extremely unlikely that the commitment will be met. If the Scottish Government wants consensus, why is it not listening to Energy Action Scotland and other organisations? The SNP manifesto pledged to build 6,000 social rented homes for each year of this session of Parliament. Is it not funny how reality sometimes gets in the way of promises and then those promises change? Ministers now talk of 6,000 affordable homes, rather than the manifesto pledge. Of those, only 4,000 are now to be social rented. Even that less ambitious target is unlikely to be met, given that the money available for new affordable homes in the three-year period ahead is more than 60 per cent less than it was in the previous period. The target is to be achieved by giving lower subsidies per house. Even if that is successful, it is likely to be at the expense of social rented homes being built where they are most needed. Bluntly, the subsidy of £40,000 per unit is not enough to make building new social rented accommodation a feasible proposition in areas of high deprivation.

No, I want to move on. Social landlords have to pass on the increased costs somehow, but many households cannot afford higher rents, and those that can are not common in deprived areas. The minister told me recently that there is some flexibility for projects in such areas, but if higher subsidies are made available, that will reduce the overall number of units that can be built. What of the other 2,000 affordable homes? Half are to come from subsidised home ownership and half from “intermediate rented homes” through the national housing trust. Intermediate or mid-market rents are, by definition, higher than some people can afford and are of limited use in areas of high deprivation and unemployment, such as parts of Motherwell and Wishaw, where help is most needed. Scotland needs 10,000 new affordable homes a year to meet demand. With reduced budgets, there is no way that that can be achieved. As well as new affordable housing, we need to upgrade the existing housing stock. We need investment to improve the energy performance of housing, including existing private housing. The draft budget and spending review are underwhelming in their lack of ambition and do not provide the sort of investment that is necessary to deliver the emissions savings that the report on proposals and policies allocated to domestic energy efficiency to meet the requirements of the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009. That is an extremely serious issue, because Scotland’s housing is responsible for a quarter of our carbon emissions, but it is not only our climate change progress that will suffer—there are serious consequences for the economy and fuel poverty. Most improvements in energy efficiency will pay for themselves through lower bills, but those who have the most difficulty paying for fuel are also those who have the most difficulty making and paying for improvements to increase their home’s energy efficiency. A third of Scottish homes—770,000 households—are in fuel poverty, and the latest fuel price rises are set to push that figure nearer to 1 million. Not spending on energy efficiency and fuel poverty creates other costs elsewhere. According to the Fuel Poverty Advisory Group, for every £1 that is spent on fuel poverty, 42p is saved by the national health service. Such work is not only a great way of spending to save and meeting emissions targets; it acts as a significant stimulus to employment and the economy. It is estimated that nearly 10,000 job opportunities could be created through improving the energy efficiency of our existing building stock. “Housing is crucial to the economic, health and social wellbeing of Scotland’s people.” Those words are not mine or my party’s, although I am sure that we would agree with them; they are from the SNP manifesto. Neglect them at your peril.

I am sure that members will agree that my constituency, Motherwell and Wishaw, is not commonly associated with the fishing industry. However, there are connections beyond the consumption of kippers for breakfast and haddock suppers. Historically, Ravenscraig was the heart of the Scottish steel industry, supplying the raw materials for shipbuilding. We know what it is like to live in a community that is built around a particular commodity, facing an uncertain and unpromising future, so I have a lot of sympathy for our fishing communities. I recognise the importance of creating and safeguarding a viable, community-focused fishing industry. That needs to be at the heart of the common fisheries policy. The long-term needs of communities that rely on fishing can be met only by establishing and developing policies and practices that protect and promote sustainable fishing. If we cannot protect fish stocks and allow overfished species to recover, our fishing communities will continue to struggle. Climate change presents major challenges to marine ecosystems, and we must be wary of the combined impact of overfishing, climate change and the use of destructive and damaging fishing practices, particularly in breeding and nursery areas. The CFP has not been adequate to that task. It has allowed poor management of stocks and short-term fixes that create long-term problems of overcapacity fleets, overfished waters, rules that are disregarded and fish that are discarded. The new proposals are a step in the right direction, in that they put conservation and long-term management of species at maximum sustainable yields at the heart of the policy, but they are not yet sufficiently robust to ensure that those objectives are met. We still need to put some flesh on the bones of the new CFP. We need workable mechanisms, definitive timescales and allocated responsibilities to turn a laudable wish into a practical reality. An essential element is the creation of clear mechanisms for regional fisheries management to support the fishing industry and communities while protecting the long-term ecological viability of fish stocks. As for discards, commercialisation is clearly a second best to not catching the unwanted fish. Changes in fishing gear can be augmented by increasingly sophisticated technology to ensure better-targeted catches and to avoid the bycatch of non-target species. It is essential that the EU fishing quotas are based on scientific advice, but the application of the quotas should take account of social and environmental impacts and include measures to address the hardship that can be caused. The adoption of more sustainable fishing practices should be supported not only through help and advice to the fleet but through fishing rights. Trading rights should not be regarded simply as a market-driven means to promote more efficient operations but ought to be controlled to encourage those who operate in the most sustainable manner. The marine environment is very important to Scotland. Two thirds of UK fish are landed here and we have done much to protect our marine environment through Scottish legislation, but there is only so much that can be done at this level. We need coherent, focused and workable agreements at European and global level. My participation in the debate has been without any expert knowledge of fishing communities or the CFP, but I know about the consequences when a community loses a particular commodity on which it is so dependent. Let us get this right. I just wish that we could put aside the political carping. I hope that the common fisheries policy can become part of the solution, rather than part of the problem.

6. To ask the Scottish Executive whether it will reintroduce the open market shared equity scheme. (S4O-00179)

I thank the minister for his response, which answered my question.

3. To ask the Scottish Executive what consideration it gives to the impact of lower subsidies for new social housing in areas of high deprivation. (S4O-00124)

A combination of low house prices, difficult land issues, high levels of poverty and reliance on housing benefit will leave some areas that are already suffering badly in the same situation for years. Raising borrowing and therefore rent will be difficult, and introducing mid-market rents will not be achievable as a solution in those areas. Is it not the case that the cut in subsidy for social housing will undermine the delivery of regeneration for some of our most deprived areas?

The cabinet secretary’s so-called prudence is a triumph of luck over judgment: an unintended consequence of running down reserves to plug the black hole in expenditure that Sir John Elvidge recently highlighted. What discussions has the cabinet secretary had with Sir John regarding his view that the Scottish Government’s current spending plans are, effectively, unsustainable?

2. To ask the Scottish Executive whether additional funding will be made available to enable local authorities to meet collection of food waste and other zero waste plan targets. (S4O-00073)

I welcome Scotland’s first-ever recycle week, but how will councils meet expectations such as that for a food waste bin for every household when they might have no additional funding? Last year, it was suggested that money could be taken from the £80 million in the zero waste fund but, so far, £4 million is on offer, and that is subject to funding applications. Should such initiatives be better funded and should funding be shared among all local authorities to help them to meet their 70 per cent target?

The minister’s statement referred to police and firefighters’ pensions. I am sure he will agree that our emergency services do a remarkable job in supporting our communities. However, he will be aware of his Government’s plans to reorganise those services. What discussions has he had with the Fire Brigades Union Scotland and the Scottish Police Federation about the proposed pension changes and how the Scottish Government’s reorganisation of those services might affect such matters?

15. To ask the Scottish Executive what the average change in charges for council services has been for households since the introduction of the council tax freeze. (S4O-00046)

Does the minister recognise that the underfunded council tax freeze provides little or no benefit to those who rely most on council services, because cuts in services and increases in charges for services such as home care can easily outweigh any benefit? What is the Scottish Government doing to address the regressive nature of the tax freeze?

Having the opportunity to make my first speech in the Scottish Parliament is a proud moment. I thank the voters of Motherwell and Wishaw, because it is an honour and a privilege to represent them. My constituency has of course been very ably served for the past 12 years by Jack McConnell, whose illustrious career has now taken him to the House of Lords, with the title of Baron McConnell of Glenscorrodale. I am sure that everyone here will join me in thanking our longest-serving First Minister for his enormous contribution to this Parliament and the wellbeing of the people of Scotland. [Applause.] Over the next few years, Scotland will face enormous challenges. To meet those challenges, we must work with the rest of the UK and others internationally to build a greener, more sustainable environment and economy. The promises of consensus and co-operation from the Scottish Government will carry little weight if every problem is to be addressed by blaming Westminster and asking for more powers. That is the road to conflict, confusion and calamity. The public want a Scottish Government that will solve the problem, not pass the blame. Therefore, the Scottish Government’s first priority must be to ensure the best use of the powers that it has. I welcome the plans for more modern apprenticeships, which are important to the economy and to the people of Motherwell and Wishaw. The policy of no compulsory redundancies is also crucial. However, to achieve that across the whole public sector, the Scottish Government must ensure that services are adequately funded. On independence, the First Minister says that the Scottish Government is “not rushing this journey ... We shall keep travelling, and so get ever closer to home.” That constant, drip, drip, drip approach sounds like a form of torture that is designed to sap our willpower and destroy our ability to resist. That said, there is a strong case for an extension of powers such as on capital borrowing. As Richard Baker said, we support an increase in the proposed limits on short-term and capital borrowing. We also support capital borrowing powers being introduced in April 2012. As the cabinet secretary has already informed us, that could now come this year. Given the degree of consensus, that should not become a pawn in the pursuit of independence, which was played down in the election campaign but moved to centre stage immediately afterwards. In this modern world, independence is something of a relative term. The world is interdependent and we are all subject to global forces. From that perspective, the question is not about independence but about the most appropriate level of democratic decision making for each issue. Borrowing is a good example of that. Clearly, there are borrowing powers that are best exercised at the local level, at the Scottish level and at the UK level. Questions remain, however, about the borrowing methods and the circumstances and outcomes that merit such borrowing. As a former North Lanarkshire councillor, I am well aware of the advantages of being able to borrow capital to invest in and fund worthwhile projects such as the upgrading of Clyde Valley high school, in my constituency, which was promised by the Scottish Government under its Scotland’s schools for the future programme. It has now been suggested that Government support will change from capital to revenue funding, which would seriously undermine the plans that have been made and would add to the cost. I would be grateful for a reaffirmation of the Government’s support for the original plan to finance the project. The fact that my party is in opposition and the SNP is the party in power should not make the SNP the party of arrogance and disregard for people’s wishes. The Scottish public deserve more than lip service being paid to consensus; the people of Scotland deserve respect from their Government. They have elected us to help them to realise their ambitions, aspirations and self-respect. As the MSP for Motherwell and Wishaw, that is what I intend to do.