3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01870)

I heard what the First Minister said to Ruth Davidson on corroboration. To say that he needs someone as distinguished as Lord Bonomy to fix the problem simply shows how bad it has got. Appointing Lord Bonomy does not restore justice; it simply papers over the cracks with a veneer of respectability. Is it not better to work out the fix before you deliberately cause the problem? Lawmaking in reverse is a shoddy way to expect Scotland’s Parliament to act. Does the First Minister not see that?

What the First Minister is doing is asking Lord Bonomy to fit new locks to the stable door a year after the horse will have bolted. The First Minister gives soothing words in this chamber, but he knows that this is a complete shambles. Three weeks ago, I warned the First Minister that his plans on corroboration were “crackers”. He said that they were “exactly the right thing to do.”—[Official Report, 16 January 2014; c 26634.] I said that the justice secretary was “cack-handed”. The First Minister said that he was “doing his best.” Since then, Kenny MacAskill rushed an unsigned letter to the Justice Committee just minutes before its report was finalised. Within minutes of the report’s publication, he rejected it. The First Minister knows that this is a shambles and that it cannot go on. Will he now overrule the justice secretary before he causes serious damage?

That was a rather excited contribution from Kevin Stewart. It takes a Fifer to point out that not once did Kevin Stewart mention the fact that his finance secretary has not funded Aberdeen City Council to the level that he promised before the election.

I will intervene on Kevin Stewart’s intervention so that I can devote some of my four minutes to what I hoped I would be able to say. That was a long-way-round way of saying that John Swinney did not fulfil the commitment that he made that the floor funding amount would be 85 per cent of the Scottish average. Aberdeen is at about 80 per cent—79 per cent, in fact—of the average. John Swinney may come up with all the excuses under the sun about fire and police, but the commitment was to Aberdeen City Council, not to the police or the fire services. My calculation is that Aberdeen citizens are being short-changed by £89 for every man, woman and child. John Swinney said that that would not happen. He will come up with a long and complicated explanation—as he normally does on such occasions—about how it is a three-year settlement and it has to be agreed at the beginning, but the commitment was for the full term and he was not able to follow through and fulfil it. People in Aberdeen will ask Kevin Stewart why he did not raise that in the chamber when he had an opportunity to stand up for his city instead of standing up for his Government. However, I welcome the extra contributions that local government is receiving for nursery education and free school meals; we supported the budget yesterday on that basis. We argued for the nursery education measure before Christmas, so we are delighted that it is now being implemented. The task force that I have been invited to join to ensure that it is implemented effectively will be good; I hope that it will ensure roll-out to two-year-olds from vulnerable and workless households. People throughout Scotland will welcome that. I will remark again on Kevin Stewart’s outstanding speech—it was as if the world had not changed in the past two years. He forgot to mention that 130,000 extra jobs are being created because of the Con-Dem coalition, as he would describe it. He said that that plan would not work but it has, and it is delivering. We need to do more, but without Kevin Stewart’s advice.

The funding floor is 85 per cent.

I welcome in particular the announcement that was made in January. The cabinet secretary has mentioned the benefits of parents being able to get back to work, but does he recognise that a boost in early education for young people can have a big impact on the early years? Professor James Heckman has said that the best educational investment is made before the age of three. Does the cabinet secretary agree?

Today is a good day for young children, as the budget gives us a chance to change their fortunes and enable them to reach their potential. There will be a partnership between parents and the Parliament, and I thank John Swinney for the work that he has done with me to achieve a really good outcome. We underestimate the ability and potential of young children, and we should remember what the nursery education provision will do. There are three primary reasons why we want to increase nursery education for two-year-olds. First, it supplements the excellent work that is undertaken by parents. We should not underestimate the role of parents or undervalue their contribution to their child’s upbringing. Secondly, it is a route out of poverty. I believe, as a liberal, that education is the route out of poverty, and the way to tackle the inequality that we see every day in our communities but are desperate to change. It gives children the crucial extra support that they need. James Heckman, whom I have mentioned to John Swinney previously, said that the best investment that we can make in education is before the age of three. The former chief medical officer has talked about brain development and how the relationships between a child and their family and community are crucial at the earliest stages. It is clear that making that investment is essential. Finally, the increased provision gives parents the opportunity to get back to work. It is only a small number of hours every week, but the extra step back into the workplace will boost their income and employment. Ultimately, work is good, and we should encourage it. So, there are three excellent reasons why we should support the increased provision of nursery education. I am slightly disappointed that it has taken so long to get there, and I hope that fewer barriers are put up next time round. First, we were told that the policy would not work in England; then we were told that we had family nurse partnerships, which were the equivalent, so we did not need to increase provision; then we were told that we could do it only through independence; and then there was no money. We have managed to knock down each barrier. I thank John Swinney for overcoming each of them and for making the decision. That would not have happened without the persistence of members such as Malcolm Chisholm and Bob Doris, who is obviously too embarrassed to be here today to have more praise heaped on him by me. Some members have been persistent on the policy since before it was the popular thing to do. I commend the work that they have undertaken. Before Christmas, I wrote to John Swinney with five reasonable recommendations and costed proposals on the budget. I have written similar letters in every budget process since I became a member of the Parliament. The first of our proposals was on nursery education, and I am delighted that we have made progress on that. The second was on free school meals, a policy that was announced by Nick Clegg in Glasgow last autumn and which is now being delivered throughout the United Kingdom. On social housing, we suggested an innovative way of using the financial transactions money, and I hope to have further discussions with John Swinney as we progress on that. Colleges have been hit significantly by reductions in spending, so the extra £3.5 million for nursery staff support and development is welcome. We have also had good and constructive discussions with John Swinney on Shetland’s housing debt and the unique circumstances in which Shetland finds itself on that. On all five areas, significant progress has been made and there has been constructive engagement with John Swinney, which leads the Lib Dem group to believe that we can support the budget at decision time tonight. The budget is not the one that we would deliver if we miraculously changed from a group of five members to a majority group in the Parliament, but it is good enough for us to support. As John Swinney knows, we would make radical changes to Scottish Water to release funds to invest in regional development banks, broadband, energy conservation, science and infrastructure. We think that that would be a big investment in the economy and would create 100,000 jobs. Nevertheless, we recognise the position that we are in. We recognise the engagement by John Swinney and the improvements that have been made on all five areas that we raised. I am pleased that John Swinney has invited me to be part of the implementation of the nursery education roll-out for two-year-olds. I will work constructively with Aileen Campbell and her officials to ensure that we implement the policy effectively. The budget is good enough because John Swinney engaged in the process. It is worth noting, as John Swinney did, the progress on the economy. Growth is up, unemployment is down and employment is up, with 130,000 extra jobs in Scotland and 1.4 million more across the UK. Many members who said that the UK coalition’s plan would not work are now keen to say that it was their plan all along. Much more needs to be done, however, and we cannot be complacent. We need to continue to make progress on recruiting more people into companies in Scotland. However, today’s budget is a step in the right direction on nursery education, school meals, social housing, college funding and Shetland’s housing debt.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01831)

Police stop and search rates in Scotland have increased fourfold since the First Minister came to power. In the past year alone, 750,000 people were stopped and searched—most without there being any suspicion of a crime. The vast majority were young people, and 500 were under the age of 10. It is difficult to understand how children under 10 are in any position to give the police consent to search. Is he comfortable with very young children being treated that way?

If that is so clear, I presume that the First Minister will plan a further fourfold increase in stop and searches. I am genuinely disappointed that the First Minister is so blasé about use of that encroaching police tactic without checks and balances. Scotland’s Commissioner for Children and Young People has said that there is a need for appropriate safeguards. The Scottish human rights commission has said that stop and search is “largely unregulated and unaccountable”. The First Minister should be concerned about the fact that in 750,000 cases of people being stopped and searched 80 per cent had no result, and that so many young children are being targeted. He risks the alienation of a generation. Is it not time that the First Minister sanctioned an overhaul of police stop and search?

As the cabinet secretary knows, we welcome the investment in two-year-olds as well as three and four-year-olds. I know that he has plans for the following financial year, but will he give a commitment that if finance becomes available and opportunities arise to extend the scheme even further he will continue to expand the scheme to more two-year-olds?

I am normally very impressed by Gavin Brown’s forensic approach to the budget process but I think that he let himself down today. He is probably one of the few members who has not stood up for the Liberal Democrats in the chamber. As he is a fellow coalition member, I am very disappointed with his behaviour—I will be speaking to his business manager later. I think that we have disappeared into some kind of vortex when the First Minister says that he agrees with Nick Clegg’s wise words about the economy, particularly given that, only a year ago, the First Minister condemned the Deputy Prime Minister’s strategy on the economy, saying that it would not work. However, today we have seen yet again significant improvements in the economy, with unemployment in Scotland dropping down by 25,000 to 176,000 and employment going up by a further 10,000—it has gone up by 120,000 since 2010. We should remind ourselves that this is a plan that Labour and the SNP said would not work, would not be successful and would not help the economy turn the corner. We have a long way to go—we should not be complacent—but the economy is on the right track, and it would be nice if, on occasion, the Government and the Labour Party were to recognise—

Not just now. It would be nice if they were to recognise the success of the strategy that we set out and which, by and large, we have stuck to—although admittedly bits have changed to take into account issues in the eurozone and beyond. We were condemned for sticking to the strategy, but now the SNP Government claims credit for that progress. Given the Scottish Government’s policies on the NPD programme, which is falling way behind track, it is clutching at straws when it claims that somehow Scotland is in advance of the rest of the UK. I will take Kenneth Gibson’s intervention now.

I have admitted that there is a long way to go yet. However, just this week the IMF recognised in a report that it was having to upgrade our growth forecast yet again. It also said that, out of the developed countries highlighted, we are second only to the United States. That is significant progress for a plan that Kenny Gibson and his colleagues said would not work. I praise John Swinney for his approach to the Scottish Government’s budget. He is very open, he is prepared to have discussions and he listens very carefully to our proposals. I am grateful for that approach. We sent him a letter before Christmas in which we set out how we would like the consequentials to be spent and his budget to be shaped. The process does not always work—we voted against the budget last year although we voted to support it the year before—but we have already seen significant movement. John Swinney knows that I have praised the Scottish Government for getting it right on nursery education and free school meals. Save the Children has warmly welcomed the developments on nursery education—for which we have been calling for some time and which we are pleased are being introduced—and free school meals. The fact that so many children in Scotland—an estimated 40,000—do not receive free school meals even though they are classed as being in poverty means that something is not right and needs to be reformed, which is why we are in favour of the Government’s proposals. In the letter that we sent to Mr Swinney before Christmas, we made a number of other suggestions, which included match funding for Shetland to deal with its housing debts so that it can invest more in infrastructure. We also suggested extra funding for colleges to make up for the significant drop in funding between 2011-12, when college funding stood at £544 million, and 2014-15, when the proposed funding will be £521 million. We would like college funding to be restored so that some of the damage can be undone. The Scottish Government has described financial transactions funding as “funny money” and said that it is a con. However, I distinctly remember seeing Nicola Sturgeon in a fluorescent jacket earlier this week, when she praised that “funny money” as crucial in helping people to buy housing. The policy’s popularity is evident—it is amazing what a difference a year can make, with another Scottish Government conversion to a UK Government proposal. We would like that money to be diverted to increase the amount of social housing that is built in Scotland, as there has been a reduction in spending on that in recent years. We have made that suggestion to Mr Swinney. Even so, the budget will not be perfect. It might be good enough for us to vote for it, but we will have to see how discussions develop in the coming weeks. If we were running the budget by ourselves, we would do some things differently. We would use Scottish Water borrowing differently. Rather than lending £150 million to Scottish Water this year, we would allow it to source that funding from the markets because we believe that, as a solid company, it would be able to access that finance elsewhere. That would allow us to undertake some of the actions on fuel poverty and active travel that WWF Scotland is calling for. We need to invest in those areas. It would also allow us to extend nursery provision to the 40 per cent of two-year-olds who are currently being provided for in England. That is the progress that we would make. I can say to Mr Swinney that the discussions will continue and that we will be constructive. We look forward to finding ways of reaching agreement on those issues.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01813)

I praise the Cabinet Secretary for Justice for acknowledging arguments made by opponents of the abolition of the requirement for corroboration and for moving his position, but the solution that he proposes is crackers. Can the First Minister think of another occasion on which the Government has said, “Pass this law, and we will decide what to do later. It is safe to vote for this because we will fix it afterwards”? Does he really expect the Parliament to vote for the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Bill—a bill that abolishes a great Scottish legal safeguard, that the Government says is incomplete and that is so bad that it will need fixed later?

The First Minister knows that I like to be reasonable when we agree but, for something so fundamental to be dealt with in such a cack-handed fashion is something with which I could never agree. It has happened before. The Government forced through the centralisation of the police only for the chief constable to recommend fresh legislation within months. The Government tried to rush through its bill on sectarianism only to backtrack within 20 minutes. Do we really have to go through that again? Is a Cabinet Secretary for Justice dancing in circles and begging for ways to fix his bill in the full glare of the committee not enough evidence to show the First Minister that he has got it wrong on corroboration? What else does he need?

I hear what the finance secretary says, but he has stood there before and said that the UK coalition economic plan would not work. How does he explain the 1.3 million extra jobs across the UK?

Yesterday, I had to scrap my speech because the First Minister had the discourtesy to announce a very positive policy, so I am grateful to the finance secretary for not inflicting the same burden on me today, although he might not like the speech that I am about to deliver. I warmly welcomed yesterday’s announcement on the expansion of nursery education, in combination with free school meals for the early primary years. As people heard yesterday, I give credit where it is due. Members will not find a fiercer critic of the nationalists when they get it wrong—which happens quite often—but I refuse to condemn them when they get it right. Yesterday, they got it right, so I praised them for doing so. When I offer my critique of the SNP today, the nationalists might disagree, but they will not be able to accuse me of blind and narrow opposition; that is just not me.

Is it on the point about blind opposition?

I am coming out in a rash, but I am happy to continue to praise the SNP for 30 seconds more. However—it is a big “however”—when it comes to independence, the economy and finance, I am afraid that there is a bit more of a gulf between our two parties. Yesterday’s announcement showed what we can do with devolution, although the nationalists said that it could be done only with independence. Their actions have undermined their case. Really progressive and fair actions are possible only with a strong economic base, and the coalition Government is building a stronger economy. Following the difficult decisions in the early days to bring our finances under control, we are now seeing a return to growth that the nationalists and Labour said would not be possible. The growth rate is up, the business confidence level is up and the unemployment rate is down. We have 1.3 million more jobs, which is mirrored in Scotland by 110,000 more jobs. That is almost exactly our population share. There is next to no SNP jobs bonus. On the one hand, the nationalists claim credit for the growing economy here, but on the other hand they say that they do not have the powers to grow that economy. It is just like their criticism of the UK coalition Government policy—they say that the economic policy will not work, then claim credit when it does work.

I will not, just now. Let us contrast that economic growth and rising employment with the uncertainty of independence. There is uncertainty over the currency, but we cannot leave the UK and then demand the benefits of the UK. There is uncertainty over the terms of membership of the European Union, but we cannot expect all 28 member states of the EU to agree to every demand on the rebate or even on fishing rights. There is also uncertainty over the affordability of public services; because of our faster ageing population and volatile oil revenues, our finances will be tighter. It was not I who said that—it was the finance secretary himself, in the famous memo that he wrote to the Cabinet. I appreciate—this is Patrick Harvie’s point—that no one can exactly predict the future. However, with independence we are talking about a whole different order of uncertainty to compound the normal uncertainty that we have in life. I do not want to derail the progress that we are making on the economy at UK level with the uncertainty of independence. I have always been a pragmatic but strong supporter of the UK. I am a proud Scot and a Fifer who wants to continue Scotland’s enduring relationship with our friends across the UK, whether they are in Liverpool, Manchester or Cornwall, where I lived for many years. I have a vision for a stronger economy and a fairer society—not just for us, but across the UK. As a Liberal Democrat, I want everyone to get a chance to get on. It is why we have increased the tax thresholds to ensure that people on low and middle incomes can be relieved of income tax. I want to move to a position where people on the minimum wage do not pay any income tax at all. Pensions have increased and nursery education and free school meals have been delivered. Those are the benefits of devolution based on a strong economy. The Liberal Democrats and the Liberals before us have a long and proud tradition of advocacy of home rule in a federal UK—from Gladstone through Steel to those who made the case that ultimately led to this Parliament—but the job is not done. I want to see further financial and constitutional powers being transferred to the Scottish Parliament not because I believe in separating power but because I believe in local power. That will be sustainable constitutional reform—a settlement that means we can determine our own destiny on the domestic agenda while sharing risk and reward with the rest of the UK. Consensus is emerging; the devo more project, the devo plus group, Labour, the Conservatives and the trade unions are publishing plans. I am sure that we will also have the nationalists on board in that growing consensus by the end of the year. We are building a stronger economy and a fairer society that will give everyone the chance to get on. We are on the right track with the economy. Let us not derail that progress with the uncertainty of independence. I move amendment S4M-08714.1, to leave out from first “; agrees” to end and insert: “, including falls in unemployment and rises in employment that match exactly the pattern across the UK; believes that a stable UK Government provided by the coalition in the most challenging financial and economic circumstances has been in the national interest; notes that there are 110,000 more people in employment in Scotland than three years ago and that this figure far exceeds the flagship employment proposals of the Scottish Government; further notes that this is being done while cutting income tax for workers by £700 and increasing the state pension by the highest ever cash amount, and believes that the determined path to a stronger economy and a fairer society is through partnership within the United Kingdom.”

Will the member give way?

I thought that Richard Baker hit the nail on the head as regards the argument that independence would bring more freedom and, as Patrick Harvie would claim, more possibility, but that everything would also stay the same—that we would keep the pound, the single market and the common travel area. Apparently, independence would retain all the things that are good about the UK. I thought that Richard Baker made a good speech. I also thought that the exchange between John Mason and Murdo Fraser on inequality was thoughtful and engaging. Murdo Fraser set out how the claims on being the fourth most unequal country in the modern world were disputed and brought in the welfare arguments. Then we heard about John Mason’s practical experience on the ground in Glasgow. I think that some of the figures and analysis are wrong but I am dissatisfied with the levels of inequality in the United Kingdom and in Scotland. I want the position to change. That is why—

Not just now. The member could turn down the volume a wee bit—I would still be able to hear him. That is why we are so passionate and why we talk so often about the tax thresholds. It is appalling that people who are on the minimum wage pay income tax. Those people deserve every chance that they can get to move on in their lives. They have made the effort to take a job that is not particularly rewarding or well paid, so why are we taxing them? Instead, we should take them out of the tax system altogether.

Not just now. That is why we are proposing to take the tax threshold up to £12,500—that is why we want to make that change. That is also why I am particularly disappointed in the white paper, which promised so much. It says that we will increase the tax thresholds just by inflation. It does not propose matching what the Lib Dems would like to do across the United Kingdom or recognise the transformational effect that raising those tax thresholds can have on incentivising people into work. As I said, I thought that that was a useful exchange but, in some ways, it missed the point, which is that we should be prioritising the action that we need to take to reduce inequalities. I am always fascinated by the nationalist claim that independence will mean that we will be free from the fiscal controls that are imposed by George Osborne, Iain Duncan Smith and the so-called Conservative Government. [Interruption.] We are in it—believe me, we are in it. We feel it. [Laughter.] If we look at SNP policy on independence, we can see that it proposes to wed Scotland to, not remove it from, such a Government. On welfare, for instance, the repeated claim is that £2.5 billion or so—depending on which figures we use—has been taken out of the Scottish economy because of welfare cuts by Westminster. However, the proposals on welfare in the white paper are only to scrap the bedroom tax, the personal independence payment and universal credit. There is no mention of restoring the £2.5 billion—not one mention of restoring the full so-called cut. By my calculation, the SNP has agreed to reverse only 2 per cent of that £2.5 billion cut, leaving 98 per cent of Iain Duncan Smith’s budget cuts in place. If I am wrong, the SNP should tell us otherwise; it should tell us how it will pay for restoring that cut. I have not heard it tell us that. There is a reason for that issue not being mentioned. The fiscal commission working group report sets out in detail, in the context of the oil fund, the need for an independent Scotland to control spending and follow the same “downward trajectory” as the UK on the control of spending.

No. Therefore, the SNP would match the UK timetable on the reduction in spending. In order to keep the pound, it is also proposing to have a monetary union with the rest of the United Kingdom. It is proposing a fiscal pact. Such a pact would put in the hands of the UK Treasury—in the hands of the George Osbornes of the future—control over Scottish spending. There are two proposals: one for a fiscal body, which has been set out in detail, and one for a fiscal pact. It is claimed that there will somehow be a massive increase in spending to undo all the evils of the UK Government, but that is just not the case.

Not just now. It is clear that the claims in the wish list that is set out in detail in the white paper are not based on reality. Patrick Harvie spoke about the need for more powers. We are passionate about having more powers for Scotland—we have a long tradition of committing to that. Alongside many others, we fought for the Parliament, and we want to go further, because we can get the best of both worlds. Many of the things that the nationalists would like to achieve through having more powers closer to home can be achieved through home rule in a federal United Kingdom. We can choose to do things on the domestic agenda in different ways while sharing with the rest of the UK the risks and rewards— Linda Fabiani rose—

No—I am sorry.

We can get the benefits and the best of both worlds. That is what we should strive for, and that is why I agree with Patrick Harvie that we should set out more of the detail. We have already done so, and we encourage people to do more in that regard so that we can get a sensible constitutional settlement for the whole United Kingdom.

I happen to agree with John Swinney on the referendum on membership of the EU. That is why we are firmly in favour of staying in the EU. I hope that he will join me and others who are in favour of the EU so that we can stay in that structure and can continue to grow within it.

Will the First Minister give way?

The speech that I had prepared for today has been slightly overtaken by events, and I am delighted about that. I used to get a groan every time I stood up to ask the First Minister a question about nursery education, but there will be no groaning today when I raise the issue. Bob Doris and I have ploughed a lonely furrow for some time to persuade the First Minister of the benefits of nursery education for two-year-olds, and we have been proved right today. I am pleased that the First Minister has listened to the pleas that we have made during that time because we know that the best educational investment that we can make is in two-year-olds. It can change their lives. We have heard from experts such as James Heckman about the impact that can be made. We can have a big impact on a child’s development if we invest in them at that age. The main issue that we are discussing today is poverty. If we are going to break the intergenerational cycle of poverty, we can make an effort to do something for people at later stages, such as work on youth unemployment, or we can try to improve people’s life chances through working with schools, but the best impact that we can make is on people at the age of two. I am therefore pleased that the First Minister has listened. We have not quite achieved the 20 per cent entitlement that I wanted, but I do not want to be too begrudging about it. It is a step in the right direction and children will welcome it.

I am grateful for that generous offer, and I certainly will take the First Minister up on it because it is important to ensure that the policy is implemented effectively. I think that he slightly exaggerates what is happening down south because I know that tens of thousands of two-year-olds are walking through the doors of nurseries and quite effectively receiving good-quality education. I also welcome the commitment on free school meals because significant numbers of young children get caught out—they do not benefit from free school meals because, even though they are poor, they do not qualify for them. Therefore, the rounded policy that extends free school meals to all young children so that they get a good meal in their stomach every single day that they are at school is a welcome development. Despite what some of the critics say, it will also help to change the life chances of young children. If we can ensure that children are properly fed when they are at school, that will make a significant difference.

I will give way to the very generous Bob Doris.

It is important, but it is not the most important issue. Making sure, during difficult times, that we are putting money back in families’ pockets is probably the priority, and making sure that kids have a good meal at school is an issue too. I have to say that none of this stuff would be happening if Nick Clegg had not taken the step that he did last autumn, because the Scottish Government was not moving very fast on free school meals up to that point. However, as I am trying to be generous today, I do not want labour that point. What is at the centre of the Scottish Government’s decisions is that they prove that this Parliament can deliver on poverty. They prove that devolution can work, which has not been the script from the SNP in recent weeks and certainly not post the white paper. The SNP said that none of this would be possible without independence, but today’s announcements have shown that we can deliver things that can change people’s lives and tackle poverty using the powers that this Parliament has. I hope that the SNP does not try to use the barrier of independence again on significant policies such as this in order to try to win votes in the referendum. It would be a retrograde step if the SNP were to do so. I welcome today’s announcement; I think that it is a step in the right direction. I will be pressing the First Minister to go further. I know that he wants to go further and I think that it is important to go further, but it is a welcome step on free school meals and on nursery education. I think that children across the country today will be welcoming this step. When they look back in 20 years’ time, they will be glad that they had the chance of nursery education at an early stage because it might just change their life chances—it might remove them from poverty and it might make Scotland a better place. I move amendment S4M-08707.2, to leave out from “deplores” to end and insert: “recognises that free school meals help tackle child poverty and promote child welfare and educational attainment; further recognises that free school meals save families at least £330 per child per year; notes that free meals will be available to all reception and infant pupils in England from September 2014 and that the Scottish Government has received a Barnett consequential from this policy; further notes that, from September 2014, 40% of two-year-olds in England will be entitled to early education provision for 15 hours per week; notes that the Scottish Government has also received a Barnett consequential from this policy; is concerned that the Scottish Government has refused to match these early steps on childcare and has stated that it will not do so until it achieves a Yes vote in the independence referendum; believes that this position is neither sustainable nor in the interests of young people in Scotland and that the Scottish Government should embrace change, and looks forward to a positive future in Scotland where children growing up are not treated as political pawns and receive early education equipping them for a lifetime of achievement, where their parents benefit from the resulting increased flexibility allowing them to take up more employment, adding to the record numbers of people in Scotland currently in work, and all are supported by further income tax cuts for workers to add to the £700 already saved per person because of the action taken by the UK Government since 2010 with the combination of such policies lifting families out of hardship and poverty.”

This morning, I received an email from the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth’s office inviting me to come and discuss the budget letter that I sent him before Christmas. That letter set out our reasonable, costed and constructive proposals. I have to say to the finance secretary that his First Minister has rather circumvented those discussions with his announcements on childcare and free school meals. However, I welcome that circumvention. I do not know whether the First Minister is bidding for the finance secretary’s position as well as everything else, but it is a good step in the right direction. It is striking that the debate has not been about whether we increase childcare and nursery education for two-year-olds but about how we do it and what is the constitutional settlement under which we can best achieve that. As a Liberal, I find it heartening that there is a consensus across the Parliament for early intervention to create a life-changing chance for young children, because that has not always been the case. Not everybody has supported the policy. Some people find it quite odd to send two-year-olds into nursery education. They believe that it is quite a young age to do that. I believe that it is the chance for us, together with families, to make a big difference to their life chances. As a Liberal, I believe that the way to tackle the ingrained poverty in many parts of Scotland is education. That is why we have supported a pupil premium down south and have been strong advocates of the college education system. It is also why I am pleased that we have the nursery education commitment. It is not quite as much as I would like—15 per cent in the first year rising to 27 per cent in the second, when I wanted 20 per cent and 40 per cent—but I am not quibbling because it is a big step in the right direction after 18 months of repeated questions about it. I am delighted. I think that Stewart Maxwell’s contribution to the debate was one of the best. It set out very well the arguments in favour of nursery education—the impact that it can have on offending rates among children who otherwise would be embedded in crime because of the start that they have had in life, on the work chances for those very same people, and on the opportunities that it gives parents to get back to work because of the relief that it provides. However, it is not just about the extra hours. Many professionals in the sector are anxious that we do not just shove children into nursery education establishments without quality being attached to that education. The early years collaborative and the work that Aileen Campbell is doing on this is excellent. We need to focus on quality as much as quantity. Everybody in the chamber should hear about Suzanne Zeedyk’s work and philosophy on attachment, the excellent lectures that Harry Burns gives on brain development and James Heckman’s work. Given all that work, I am very pleased that we are taking steps in the right direction. I was also pleased to hear what was said about free school meals. The Child Poverty Action Group has advocated guaranteeing young kids a good meal in school every day, so we are happy to support that measure. Good steps in the right direction are being taken. We all want to tackle poverty. I do not think that anybody in the chamber is in favour of poverty—Patrick Harvie is right in that regard—we just disagree on the mechanism to tackle it. The measure that I favour is that we should make work pay, which is why I am particularly pleased about the progress that we are making on cutting tax for people on low and middle incomes. That makes work pay; it incentivises work when otherwise the decision on whether work pays might be marginal. Those are good steps and I wish that the SNP would support them, so I greatly regret that it does not. Perhaps if I work on the SNP for 18 months I might persuade it on that issue, as well. The offers that SNP members have made today—many of which I agree with—are predicated on the basis that we will automatically become wealthier if we are independent. Not everybody in the nationalist camp agrees with that; some believe that things are a bit more uncertain and that it is not guaranteed that we will be wealthier, certainly given volatile oil revenues and the fact that our population is ageing faster than that of the rest of the UK—[Interruption.] The SNP members like to cheer me on when they agree but not when they do not. Perhaps there should be a bit more consistency. The important factor is that we cannot simply assume that Scotland will be wealthier, especially when we consider the progress that we are making at UK level—1.3 million extra jobs in the past three years and 110,000 in Scotland. The increase in Scotland is mirrored; it is almost exactly the same increase as in the rest of the UK. Growth is up and business confidence is up. I would rather base my opportunities and the progress that we are going to make on that economic model than on the precarious economic model that is proposed by the SNP. Mark McDonald said that I had junked my speech. I had junked my speech, but that was only when his party junked his policy. I recognise that things have changed today and that good progress is being made in the right direction. I hope that everybody in the chamber embraces it. To be serious in conclusion, I am grateful to the First Minister for the announcement that he has made today. I think there is an opportunity for us to work together to ensure that the policy is implemented effectively, because it is important for young children that they are given the best start in life, so that we can say in 20, 30 or 40 years that today in this Parliament we made the right decision.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01778)

Yesterday’s unemployment figures show that 1.3 million more people are in work, including 110,000 in Scotland. The First Minister said that the coalition’s economic strategy would not work. There is more to be done, of course, but does not the First Minister now accept that he got it wrong?

The First Minister said that the coalition plan would not work; now he claims the credit for that plan. There is a lot more to do, but it is the coalition plan that is building the stronger economy. Taxes on jobs are down. Fuel duty has been frozen. Investment in science and broadband is up. Growth is up. The millions who are working in Scotland have had their income tax cut by £700 each. The First Minister does not support all those measures but will he, for once, recognise the achievement?

I commend the Finance Committee, which has been particularly methodical, thorough and persistent in the pursuit of issues that might otherwise go unobserved by the public and the Parliament. The exchange between Gavin Brown and John Swinney was instructive and we might have a reasonable way forward on the links between policies, inputs and outcomes. I hope that in future more such links can be made, although I acknowledge John Swinney’s point that taking the approach to the nth degree might be an all-consuming task that would not give value for money. I was interested in the part of the report that dealt with the Scottish Futures Trust, which has been held up as the cure for our economic woes. It is just as well that we were not relying on the SFT to deliver economic recovery, because it has been disappointingly slow at getting through the NPD programme. The 2013-14 figures show reductions from £696 million to £338 million and then to £185 million, which is incredibly disappointing, because I thought that we had got over the difficulties that the Government had discovered with the NPD programme. The extra 1.3 million jobs—110,000 in Scotland—and the economic growth that is emerging do not have much to do with the SFT. I am grateful to the committee for highlighting the division between savings and delayed spending. It is clear that it is more about delayed spending than it is about cost savings. It is important that we understand the split between the two. I do not want to bring conflict into the debate. Like Malcolm Chisholm, I want to ensure that we engage seriously on the budget. I like to think that John Swinney and I have engaged constructively in previous budget rounds and I will ensure that our objectives are set out again this year. I have with me a copy of a letter that is winging its way to John Swinney’s office this afternoon, which sets out clearly what we think the objectives for this budget should be. Mr Swinney will not be surprised to know that nursery education is our top priority. Given that he has additional funding from Westminster, given that expansion in nursery education is party policy and is in the white paper, and given that he has the power to make it happen, the full complement of factors is there to enable him to deliver. Also, such an approach has the support of an unassuming character, who is probably prevented from claiming that he leads the campaign: Bob Doris. I am sure that Bob Doris’s views will have a great influence on Mr Swinney when it comes to the budget round, because I know that he is a strong advocate for improved nursery education.

I am attracted by Bob Doris’s call for massive investment in childcare, and my party advocates that. However, nothing prevents us from acting now on two-year-olds. We have suggested a modest, phased programme; some members seem to take an all-or-nothing approach. I am slightly disappointed that Bob Doris seems to dispute that we can act now, because I have held him up as a champion on the issue. I think that we can move forward together and achieve our ambitions. Perhaps we can put aside some of our differences about the longer term and, in this budget, achieve the objectives that I know that we both want to achieve. The Finance Committee has been persistent in raising issues that it raised in previous years, and there is probably an element of frustration in the report in relation to, for example, how much money has been switched from revenue to capital and from traditional to preventative spend. The issues are opaque. I understand John Swinney’s point that we should focus on outcomes rather than where the money comes from and disinvestment, but if there is to be genuine change in how we deliver public services we need to know where the money is coming from, so that we can develop services that can endure over the long term. We know that Scotland faces considerable challenges, not just because of the demographics, but in tackling poverty and ensuring that we meet our environmental objectives. Enduring on all those things means that we need evidence of a proper seismic shift of investment from one area to the other. I would therefore encourage John Swinney to be more open and transparent about the shift from traditional spend to preventative spend, and from revenue to capital spend. That way, we will see that we have an enduring, long-term shift in the delivery of public services.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01753)

I can tell the First Minister that I was genuinely pleased that nursery education has secured such a prominent place in his white paper. It is good that we can agree that nursery education is a priority, even though he and I will disagree about the best constitutional arrangement to deliver it. However, he says that his new plan can be delivered only with independence, whereas I want to take the first steps now for two-year-olds. Cannot we put aside our differences on the constitution to do it? The commitment in the white paper is now combined with extra funds from Westminster. It means that he can act in next year’s budget. Will he consider putting extra support for two-year-olds in that budget?

No one expects the First Minister to deliver full-time places from the age of one from next August. No one is saying that. Even his plan will take until 2024. Parents across Scotland will be mystified as to why he will not act now on childcare for two-year-olds. He has the power and he has the support across the chamber, his party policy backs it, and now he has the extra money. There is nothing on earth that should stop him delivering for two-year-olds from next August. I am sorry to say that he has given a good impression of a man imprisoned by his obsession with independence. The children should not lose out because we cannot agree on the constitution. Can he at least confirm that new provision for two-year-olds will be put on the table for talks between our parties in the budget?

I thank the cabinet secretary for advance sight of his statement, but I have to say that I was disappointed to notice that, once again, Aberdeen is losing out on funding. He previously promised to ensure that funding for the city would not fall below 85 per cent of the national average, but the figures at the back of his statement show that he has failed to meet that commitment yet again. Next year, Aberdeen will, as it was this year, be £20 million short, which equates to £88 per person. Is the cabinet secretary prepared to take any steps to make good his promise from two years ago?

I do not want to interrupt the sunny and bright tone of Michael McMahon’s contribution, but does he recognise that there is some growth and that there is predicted to be more growth rising in the years ahead? That is something that he can at least recognise.

Will the member give way?

I commend Gavin Brown for his characteristic generosity. He has given Labour and SNP back benchers the opportunity to speak up for the solid progress that has been made in the UK economy. We would have been denied that opportunity to debate the autumn statement if it had been left up to the Government’s business managers. Thanks to Gavin Brown, we have that opportunity. I have to say, however, that most back benchers do not seem to have seized the moment to recognise that significant change. The exception is Linda Fabiani, who seems to be using the opportunity to distance herself from the SNP’s corporation tax policy right in front of the finance secretary’s eyes. I wonder whether she is going to join others on the back benches nearer to Patrick Harvie than to the finance secretary. We should recognise that the UK coalition Government has stuck to the economic plan that was set down three years ago despite the foreign-debt crisis abroad, the problems with the EU economy and the denunciation of others—many of whom are in this chamber—who said that growth would return only if we spent more. Because we stuck to the plan, we are building a stronger economy. Growth this year is predicted to have doubled to 1.4 per cent, is forecast to rise to 2.4 per cent next year and is expected in the following four years to be 2.2 per cent, 2.6 per cent, 2.7 per cent and 2.7 per cent.

I will give way in a second. The finance secretary might like to take the opportunity to acknowledge that all the warnings that he gave us years ago—that we would not be able to grow the economy without spending more—were not true, and that he should have believed in us more than in what he was saying.

The chancellor stuck to the plan, but the finance secretary wanted him to deviate from it and to spend an additional £10 billion on top of the extra spending that he had condemned previously. However, the finance secretary now wants to take the credit for what is happening in Scotland while saying that nothing that the UK Government has done has worked in Scotland. He lacks credibility on that matter in all ways. I urge him not to intervene again in case he falls into a similar trap. Employment is up to 400,000 extra jobs this year. Unemployment is also lower than it was in 2010, despite Mr Swinney’s advice. In 2018, it is expected to fall further to 5.6 per cent, which will match where Scotland is, so right across the UK we are getting the benefits of the economic growth. We have the lowest proportion of workless households for 17 years, businesses have created three jobs for every one that has been lost in the public sector, and it is predicted that 3.1 million more jobs will be created by business in 2019. Far from the mass unemployment that has been predicted by Mr Swinney, we have a record number of people in work. I accept that there is much more to do—

I will not, just now. I am glad that the UK Government did not listen to many members in this chamber who wanted us to deviate from the plan that they said would not work.

No—not just now. The UK Government has put in new measures, including the abolition of national insurance contributions for under-21s, extension of the city deal to Glasgow, which I hope the Scottish Government embraces, £10 million for the Shetland Islands, £10 million for the Higgs centre for theoretical physics in Edinburgh, and money for the huge wind farm in the outer Forth Estuary, for the Ineos plant at Grangemouth and for Countesswells in Aberdeen.

Not just now. Those measures are on top of the cancellation of Labour’s fuel duty rise, the money for free school meals, the £50 reduction in energy bills and so much more, including the tax threshold increase that has reduced the tax for hardworking people. The crucial opportunity that the autumn statement has given is to two-year-old children.

Everybody in this chamber now supports expanding quality early education for two-year-old children. A year ago, I was not so sure that that support existed, although some farsighted individuals on the SNP back benches, including Bob Doris, spoke up for that change. For last year’s budget, I prepared my costed plan and went to Mr Swinney to try to persuade him of the case’s merits. I admit that I was despondent when he did not agree to those reasonable plans. He described it as “an honest disagreement about where the focus should lie.”—[Official Report, 6 February 2013; c 16526.] Therefore, members can imagine my genuine delight with the change of approach in the Government’s white paper. What Bob Doris and I have been saying for some time has been endorsed.

With perfect timing, the coalition Government provides the money to fund that through the Barnett consequentials. We do not even need to wait for the taxes to come in; we can get on with it now.

I look forward to my annual discussion with John Swinney on the budget. I may even take Bob Doris with me.

I am grateful that the member’s calculator has been out, but does he recognise that the economy is growing? Does he think that that is a good thing?

I have never heard Mark McDonald praise the Liberal Democrats and the UK Government for raising the income tax threshold to £10,000, which would help the people whom he claims to represent. If I had heard him praise that policy, he might have a bit more credibility, but he has never done that.

I recognise that Iain Gray is trying to be positive in acknowledging that there is some growth, and that is a good thing. However, he must surely also recognise that the advice that he and others gave three years ago that we should abandon this strategy was just wrong.

Like so many others, I saw today’s remarkable scenes from Johannesburg, with presidents and prime ministers, archbishops and cardinals, and village choirs and children from Soweto gathered in one place. Nelson Mandela’s death was a moment that we all knew would come but, for most of our lives, we could only have dreamed that he would be able to pass on peacefully, in freedom and with the thanks of the world around him. The vocation of politics to play a part in a changing world grew with me in the 1980s. At that time, we had the iron curtain in Europe, the cold war across the world and apartheid in South Africa. Then there was that brief, remarkable time, when Nelson Mandela was out of prison and president of South Africa; Václav Havel was out of prison and president of the Czech Republic; and Lech Walesa was president of Poland—three things that had seemed impossible just five years earlier. I can only imagine the impact on those individuals and on the people who had campaigned for decades. First among those campaigners in the context of the Scottish Parliament was David Steel, who was a member of the Anti-Apartheid Movement—he became the movement’s president—from his first days in politics in the 1950s and 1960s. In 1986, when he was leader of the Liberal Party, he delivered the annual freedom speech at the University of Cape Town. He has written about that in the past few days, saying that the South African foreign minister, Pik Botha, refused him permission to visit Nelson Mandela and asked why the west was so obsessed with “this chap”. Within five years, he knew why. Nelson Mandela led a peaceful but fundamental change to democracy in South Africa. We no longer hear the word “apartheid”, with all the evil, cruelty, division and injustice that was its true meaning and at the core of that rotten system. The world is a better place for that. Apartheid South Africa was almost alone in the world. We boycotted its goods and shunned its businesses and spokespeople. We can now be proud of the South African embassy in Trafalgar Square in London, but back then people went there only to protest about injustice and to demand Mandela’s freedom and an end to apartheid. Mandela was a leader, a statesman and certainly an inspiration, but he suffered as a man. His daughter Makaziwe spoke yesterday, with something of her father’s uplifting manner, about how her father sought not just political but spiritual freedom. She spoke about how Mandela thought that if he did not forgive others he would remain imprisoned. Such spiritual freedom has been a feature of these days of mourning. There have been personal stories of kindness. I was particularly moved by what Gordon Brown said on the radio a few days ago. He said that after his son was born he received a call, at home, from Nelson Mandela. It was not a routine call of congratulation but a call from a father to a father; an intimate call, from a parent who had lost a son to another who had lost a daughter—a human touch. As Makaziwe reminded us, to her dad was given the strength that enabled him to be the champion of forgiveness and reconciliation. Mandela did not want the hurt that he had suffered to be part of anyone else’s life. Through his strength, he gave a future to the country of South Africa, which could so easily have failed. He also inspired reconciliation after other conflicts, not least in Northern Ireland, where many brave individuals have put their losses and tragedies behind them. In captivity, Nelson Mandela inspired us with his struggle, and on his release he gave us hope across the world. Today, as we reflect on his life, he lifts us again, to work for a better world, where, as he said, we “close the circle” and “herald the advent of a glorious summer of a partnership for freedom, peace, prosperity and friendship.”

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01714)

How many of the people whom he listed to Johann Lamont have more power than Mr Rajoy? None of them. It is the Spanish Prime Minister’s word against the First Minister’s word, but Mr Rajoy has the veto. The First Minister does not need most European Union countries to back Scotland; he needs every single one, and they all know that he has nowhere else to go. At breakfast yesterday, there was little doubt over Scotland’s place in the EU; by tea time, there was little certainty. What will the First Minister trade to get the Spanish on board?

The First Minister really should not answer the questions that I did not ask. He is obviously relying on his powers of persuasion with the Spanish Prime Minister. However, all of us in this chamber remember his six red lines on the Scotland Act 2012 and that he sold out on every single one of them. That was negotiating with only one Government, and that is why he has been called the worst negotiator in the northern hemisphere.

When the Croatian ambassador was in this building, he said that countries have to “take pretty much what is offered.” Every country has had to trade things away to secure a place in the EU. Will the First Minister sell out our Scottish fishermen for a Spanish vote? [Interruption.]

What about the rebate, the Schengen agreement or the euro? We all know that he will say anything to get independence—[Interruption.]

Who will he sell out to get the vote that he needs?

The change in the debate on this subject compared with last year is remarkable and I welcome the fact that we have got back to more of a consensus on drugs misuse. The issue was probably all sparked off, to David Clegg’s great delight, by the Daily Record, which targeted what it called the methadone millionaires. I met Mr Houlihan who was a so-called methadone millionaire. He is a pharmacist who has built up his business and works in some of the hardest communities in the west of Scotland. I have never seen a pharmacist more engaged in the interests of the people whom he serves. He wants to change their lives, and I was inspired by his commitment to his community, so I did not recognise him as a methadone millionaire. I think that the profit and the turnover were mixed up on that. He was not, as he was characterised in the Daily Record, somebody who did not care about the people whom he served. The report was also inspired by the concern that methadone was triggering a number of deaths from drugs. It should be recognised that many commentators said that it was really about a heroin drought that, in that period, was forcing drug users to experiment with different types of drugs. When people experiment, sometimes things go wrong. Methadone itself was not the problem; there were wider issues at play as well. We were also dealing with a group of people who dropped in and out of services and had chaotic lives. I will not say that it is natural for such events to happen to such people, but we could understand the reasons why they happened, which is why a superficial look at the figures was not helpful. I am glad that we have got to the bottom of why the number of deaths was increasing, because I am clear that methadone is part of the solution, not part of the problem. If we compare Russia, which does not have a similar needle-exchange and methadone programme, with the United Kingdom and Scotland, we see that the blood-borne virus problems there are far greater than they are here. We should recognise the differences that we have made over time, and I am glad that the Kidd report endorsed the point of view that methadone is part of the solution, not part of the problem. I was recently at the Phoenix Futures graduation ceremony in Glasgow. I was a wee bit daunted by going into the Woodside halls in Glasgow, I have to say. There were a lot of people who—how can I put it?—have seen the hard end of life. Many of them had tattoos on their knuckles and had various other marks. However, when I went in, it struck me that they were all hugging one another. They were hard people and had seen difficult bits of their communities, but they were hugging one another. That was a mark of the success of Phoenix Futures. The organisation has created recovery communities—people who look after the emotional side of one another’s needs. It was a tremendous recommendation. Those people were delighted to have graduated out of drugs misuse, and that is the kind of project that we should celebrate. I also attended a project in Kirkcaldy not long ago and met a young man who said that he was more frightened of recovery than he was of drugs misuse. He was recovering but he said that, having come off drugs, he now saw the world and had to face up to all his demons, from which he had managed to hide in the past. He said that it was getting more difficult being in recovery. Members can understand why people dip in and out of recovery over time and that it is not easy to progress naturally from methadone to abstinence. Yesterday’s Scottish Drugs Forum conference was an excellent event that focused on trauma. Jim Eadie is right that poverty and deprivation are major contributory factors to drug misuse, but traumatic events in people’s lives—regardless of the background that they come from; people from wealthy backgrounds as well as people from poor backgrounds are affected—are significant, too. The SDF’s event focused on the effect of trauma—not just the trauma of one-off events, but longer-term trauma. Elaine Murray is right that there is still a bit of debate about what recovery is. I think that there is a general understanding that recovery means improvement and that it is different for everyone. Some people in the sector view recovery as complete abstinence, although I would not say that they are the majority. I think that that is a healthy debate. When I was at the Phoenix Futures event, someone said that they condemned methadone—they did not like touching it one bit—but the majority of people I meet in the drug misuse community recognise that it has a role to play. The issue is not just about medicine; it is also about the mind and the wider factors in life. Another consideration is the degree of compulsion that should be involved. To what extent should we encourage drug users to undergo treatment? People would never be compelled to undergo treatment, but how far along the track from encouragement to compulsion should we go? That is critical. There is also a lively debate about residential treatment versus community treatment. I think that the biggest shake-up that is needed is in the NHS. We need to try to get the NHS in the wider sense to engage properly. Drug abuse affects a range of services from housing to health to justice. Justice takes the lead, but the NHS needs to take a lead, too. That is why it is important that the medical director should be the lead person when it comes to opioid replacement. We need a person in the NHS to take a much more comprehensive lead on such matters.

Perhaps, but we should not look only to structural changes to change minds. We need to get leading people in the NHS to fully embrace drug misuse instead of just leaving it to someone else. The issue goes beyond the simple one of recovery. We need to sort out issues of housing, work and family. Another issue that I have noticed to an increasing extent is that of boredom: people who are drug misusers are just bored.

A bit of good news is the fact that the number of younger drug users is dropping. We should welcome that, because it means that we are moving in the right direction. We still have a lot of work to do, but we are moving in the right direction.

From what the minister sees in the NHS, does he think that enough senior people in the health service are committed to the job in hand? It is a huge job that crosses many departments and responsibilities in Government. Does he think that the NHS is pulling its weight?

Will the First Minister give way?

I thank the First Minister for that compliment. The First Minister talks about other countries in the world. Can he tell me whether his Government, his ministers or his officials have received any feedback from any other European Union country about Scotland’s membership of the EU? Have they indicated that that would be at all difficult? Can he tell me precisely whether he has had that feedback?

True to form, it is day two of the happy clappy sect, with starry-eyed optimism worshipping the god of positivity, and Alex Salmond the patron saint of blind optimism. I have to say that I loved the optimism on childcare. It is what I have been asking the First Minister to endorse week after week after week after week—I do not know how many weeks it went on for, but only when it aids his campaign for independence does he start to listen. The SNP is letting down a generation of young people if it does not act now, with the powers of devolution that it once trumpeted but now derides.

Not just now. The childcare package is one part of a wider offer that insisted that there would be no downsides to independence. In the white paper, there was not one example of anything that might be even slightly difficult under independence. That omission is quite striking. It makes one wonder why all the states of the world are not immediately deciding to break themselves up, based on the compelling case that was put forward yesterday. Perhaps now the white paper for independence revolution will engulf the world. However, I cannot think of any examples of modern, successful countries that have broken themselves up. The former Soviet bloc nations or war-torn countries of Africa were hardly modern, successful countries with much to lose. They are hardly examples for a modern, successful Scotland to follow.

Scottish independence is not normal. It is not the normal thing. The stakes are high, and yesterday’s white paper did not move us on. It did not reduce the risk. It did not help us to answer the serious questions that are being raised about this colossal step. The First Minister said that Scotland is better prepared for independence than any other country in the world. I was surprised that he was so modest; I thought that he was going to go on to say “the universe”. However, being prepared normally means being prepared for all eventualities. Let us, therefore, consider some of those possibilities.

Not just now.

I want to establish whether the SNP has even considered what happens if its assertions about what will happen do not come to pass.

I will let the First Minister in in a second. Perhaps he can answer the questions that he has failed to answer in his white paper, which I am about to read out. What if the remainder of the UK says that we cannot use the pound as part of a currency union? Is there a backup plan? What happens if we form a fiscal pact with the UK but it insists that we cannot borrow or spend any more? What happens to the Clyde if the Ministry of Defence orders go elsewhere? What happens to funding for our universities if the UK funding dries up? What happens if the UK does not want to buy our energy? Is the First Minister going to, for once, answer any of those questions?

I say this very gently to the First Minister: if he cannot even be trusted to match England on childcare now, why should I believe a single word that he says about it in 10 years’ time? How can I believe a word that he says? I notice that, yet again, the First Minister failed to answer the other of the five questions that I asked. I am happy to take another intervention if he wants to answer the questions about the Clyde, the universities, the fiscal pact and the currency. He has no answers for those because he has not thought about the eventualities. They are serious and reasonable questions that most people hoped that the SNP would answer in the white paper, but none of those reasonable questions has even been considered, and the SNP is certainly not sharing the answers with us. The SNP believes that it has a right and that it is right on everything and everyone else is wrong. The white paper is based on an assumption that the UK will agree to every single demand from a newly independent country. The SNP believes that people in the UK will take orders from a First Minister who has spent three years—probably 80 years—condemning them before declaring that we want to be independent from them. If we slam the door in their face, they may just lock it from the other side. However, that is just the UK. The SNP expects that the other countries of the EU and NATO will take our instructions as well. The First Minister dodged my question when I intervened on his speech. Has he received any communications from any other country in the European Union about Scotland’s membership of the EU and have such communications indicated at any stage that it might be difficult? Perhaps he does not want to give me the answer to that question, just like the many other questions that I have posed. If it seriously expects any shift in the opinion polls, the SNP needs to start answering the questions that have been posed. There is little point in talking about anything else until it addresses the fundamental problems of an independent Scotland.

Will the finance secretary give way?

Will the finance secretary give way on that point?

The finance secretary will know that in every budget I have argued that he should allocate more for childcare. On every opportunity, he has rejected that. Will I get a different response on this budget?

I like optimism as much as the Deputy First Minister, but she must be the only person on the planet who believes that there is not one single downside to independence that is worth mentioning in the white paper, and that dozens of other countries and organisations will agree to every single one of her demands on the currency, on NATO, on the European Union, and so much more. Yet if she is wrong, that is the gamble that she will have taken and the gamble that Scotland will pay the price for. One area in which the Deputy First Minister is definitely wrong is childcare. The Scottish Government has the worst childcare arrangements in the British Isles, yet the Deputy First Minister has said that she is delaying the introduction of early education for two-year-olds until after the referendum, even though it is already being delivered by the powers in England. She has the powers now, so why the delay?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01688)

Does the First Minister think that police officers are being taken off the streets to backfill civilian jobs?

If the First Minister had actually read what the chief constable said yesterday, he would not have said what he has just said to Parliament. He was actually a lot clearer about this before, because he has said in the past that it was “utter nonsense”. Yesterday, the chief constable said that it is happening “on a daily basis”. Now it is confirmed by the chief constable that police officers are being taken off the streets. We can add to that list police stations being shut to the public, control rooms being closed, Audit Scotland being scathing, chiefs being at loggerheads and the Scottish Police Authority saying that it just does not know where the savings will come from. This grand mess is something that Kenny MacAskill said was “a once-in-a-generation opportunity”. Is that not a warning that, the next time they try to sell us something that is a once-in-a-generation opportunity, people might not believe a word that they say?

Yesterday at the service at Dalgety Bay we sang the hymn “Will Your Anchor Hold”. The refrain was particularly apt. It talked about anchors that keep the soul “Steadfast and sure while the billows roll, Fastened to the rock which cannot move, Grounded firm”. That summed up Helen Eadie extremely well. She was very firm. No matter what happened around her, she was determined to carry on and achieve what she had set out to achieve. I shared a constituency with Helen for four years, and I saw at first hand the quality of service that she provided to her constituents. It was therefore no surprise when I turned up—early, I thought—at the service at Dalgety Bay and found that the hall was already packed. There were several rooms to go into, and people were standing outside. To me, that showed the respect that people in the constituency and in the Labour Party had for her. She attracted the great and good of the Labour Party, with a former Prime Minister making a tribute and her friend Baroness Ramsay making such a personal contribution to the service. We also had Cathy Peattie singing a beautiful song and members of her family doing a reading during the service. That showed that she had so many dimensions to her life, and there was clear affection from her constituents. Like Ruth Davidson and many others, I feared Helen Eadie. It was not a secret that she did not really like Liberal Democrats. She did not like Jim Tolson—[Laughter.] Now, now. I do not think that she liked me too often, or certainly not my views on proportional representation, and I do not think that she was the greatest fan of the coalition between the Liberal Democrats and Labour, and she certainly let me know it. In what I think was her last speech in the Parliament, she accused me of several things, but the very next day she was out being kind and warm and smiling, with that huge grin that immediately put people at ease. She was able to separate the personal from the political. Some of us find that hard, because we have great passion for our politics, but not Helen—she could separate the two. I remember once campaigning in Cardenden in the Glenrothes by-election when it was bucketing with rain. A car screeched to a halt, and I saw Bob Eadie in the driving seat, then Helen bounced out to berate me about my latest misdemeanour in the constituency. However, the very next day, she had a big smile and a kind heart—she recognised that we were politicians together and we had a battle together. Helen was colourful. I have laughed many times and so fondly at some of her enterprises, such as her demand about the Equal Opportunities Committee and her escapade in Cowdenbeath when she challenged young people on an estate, managed to escape and then called for a curfew in Cowdenbeath. She had a one-woman campaign to ban the amber traffic light to bring Scotland in line with Bulgaria, which she loved so much. She was not afraid of sticking out, saying different things and being colourful. We need colourful politicians like Helen, as they contribute so much. Helen was clearly a socialist. I am not a socialist, but her commitment to socialism inspired me. She was never cynical at all, and she always believed and was optimistic. She was driven, passionate and optimistic and she cared for her constituents. I saw that at first hand as an MP in the constituency that we shared—she was often there before me on issues. She cared and she delivered results. She was a warm personality, with that huge big grin of hers. Helen, today, we are celebrating your life. This is about you and, if you are watching, I hope that you appreciate it.

Will the minister take an intervention?

Will the minister give way?

Can the minister tell me how many British warships have been built outside Britain since the second world war, and can he name each and every one of them?

Will the member take an intervention?

The announcement was no surprise. People who are aware of the ebbs and flows of the defence sector and the warship sector were aware that the day was coming. The type 26 ships and the offshore patrol vessels were never going to make up for the huge activity that there was at the height of construction of the aircraft carriers and type 45 destroyers. However, although the announcement was not a surprise it has been hard for the workers involved. The real question is why it has taken such an event for the Government to wake up to the need to diversify. My constituency covers the Rosyth dockyard, as did my previous Westminster seat, and I have been asking questions about diversification for years. Why has the Scottish Government not done that for the Clyde? A crisis seems to be required before this Government takes any action at all. SNP members are making a brave attempt today, but sovereign capability has been an established principle in the Ministry of Defence and the UK Government—

Not just now. That has been the case since the second world war, and we have not built any warships outside the UK. The vessels that went to Korea were fuel tankers, not warships, and they were built on a commercial contract.

Not just now. We have protected land-war vehicles, warships, and network-enabled capability and fixed-wing aircraft. That is regarded as sovereign capability. Why do we think that the SNP will, just because it says so, change decades of UK Government policy? The yards in Portsmouth will not be closed—

Not just now. The yards in Portsmouth will not be closed until after the referendum, and that is no coincidence.

The orders for the type 26 frigates will not be placed until after the referendum. The UK Government is defending its—our—own defence interest. That is the reality.

I think that I know Gerald Vernon-Jackson a little bit better than Keith Brown does, and I know that he is standing up for Portsmouth.

I am sure that the minister has read the statement in detail and discussed it with Philip Hammond. He will know that the orders for the type 26 frigates will not be placed, and the Portsmouth yard will not close, until after the referendum. That is the reality. Members should look at Barrow, where the keep Barrow afloat campaign has been established. It is arguing that, in addition to the submarines, a shipyard capability should be constructed in Barrow. It has the ability to do so, but everybody else seems to ignore that reality.

I thank Chic Brodie for taking up half of my speech time. If Mr Brodie looks at the report in detail, he will see that it refers to Danish, New Zealand, Irish and German class vessels, and the Norwegian navy. The report talks about anything but British warships, and it has been endorsed by the SNP. One week the SNP is saying, “Let’s buy British”, and the next it says, “Let’s buy anything but British.” Chic Brodie should read the report more carefully. What we have here is a range of contradictions. The SNP condemns British foreign policy on numerous occasions but demands to build the British Government’s warships and all its vehicles, just as it campaigned for the Trident refit facility to be constructed in Rosyth in my constituency. The SNP wants those weapons of mass destruction—as it would call them—to be in tip-top condition, ready for war at any time, because it is prepared to put its principles to one side in such cases. That is the contradiction that we face with the SNP. It says, “We could be like Norway”, but it opposes Norway’s policy on the EU, which subjects Britain to the EU competition rules. In 2005, Nicola Sturgeon told us that the fisheries protection vessels should be reclassed as warships so that they can be built in this country, but the SNP expects the UK Government to do the exact opposite. Is the SNP suggesting that the type 45 destroyers or the type 26 combat ships should be reclassed as fishing vessels in the future? Is that the kind of contorted logic and the kind of ministry of defence that we could expect in an independent Scotland? The reality is that the SNP has been found wanting on the shipyards. It does not understand how British foreign policy and defence policy have been developed over decades.

The threat is to the shipyards on the Clyde and on the Forth, and the SNP needs to wake up to that.

Mr Stevenson might be educating us about various items of equipment, but I have to point out that no one has ever said that all equipment must be bought in-country. The Labour Government’s defence industry strategy and the defence and security policy that has been developed under the current UK Government have determined what the sovereign capability is, and it is the four areas that I identified in my speech.

Does the member not recognise that no British complex warships have been built outside the UK since the second world war?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way on that particular point?

Will the member give way?

Will the minister give way on that point?

8. To ask the Scottish Government what steps the Scottish Futures Trust has taken to ensure that non-profit distributing model investment achieves forecast levels. (S4O-02569)

The cabinet secretary earlier listed lots of projects that she expected to start, but we have been expecting those projects to start for what seems like a lifetime. The NPD programme was originally intended to provide a massive stimulus to the economy. Does she believe that the programme has achieved that objective when we needed it most?

3. To ask the Deputy First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01651)

I thank the Deputy First Minister for her expressions of sympathy for the Portsmouth workers, as well as for those in Glasgow, who are losing their jobs. The workers in Portsmouth are also losing their yard. Everyone here is arguing with sincerity about the future of Scottish shipbuilding. The big problem for the Deputy First Minister is that what she has said to Johann Lamont today is not what she has said in the past about procuring ships. Let us look at what she said about a fisheries protection vessel before she was a minister. She said: “it should be reclassified as a grey ship in order that the work can simply be given to a Scottish yard.” The Sturgeon shipbuilding doctrine, powerfully put, was that warships should be built inside the national boundary. She wanted the then Scottish Government to pretend that our fishing patrol ships were warships so that they could be built here, but now she wants the UK Government to do the opposite. Does she see no inconsistency between what she said then and what she is saying now?

I know a little bit about defence, as I sat on the Westminster Defence Select Committee for a number of years. I also represented Rosyth, so I know one or two things about Rosyth. When Nicola Sturgeon talks about the order being placed in another country, that would open it to competition, which is the whole point about Korea and the Korean yards. That was an open competition, in which the British yards did not even compete. The type 26 frigates are complex warships, whereas the fleet tankers are not. She should know that, and if she does not understand it, she needs to get a bit more advice. Nicola Sturgeon’s own doctrine says that warships should be built inside the state boundary and, as she said, article 346 makes it clear that that can happen. I remind her that she said that fishing patrol vessels should be reclassified, so that the work could simply go to a Scottish yard, but she expects the UK Government to ignore that doctrine—that is, “Do as I say, not as I do.” Her gamble is that the rest of the UK would do the opposite of what she would do. I want the relationship between the Royal Navy and the Clyde to continue to deliver jobs and opportunities. Does the Deputy First Minister’s gamble not put that at risk?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01632)

This weekend, the First Minister will be heading to China on his first visit to the country since he snubbed the Dalai Lama on his visit here. The First Minister shamed Scotland with his treatment of the Tibetan spiritual leader when he kowtowed to the Chinese consul general. We are told that the First Minister is heading east this weekend, but we have not been told what he will say on human rights. What will he do differently on his visit to China this time to be clear on human rights while developing economic partnerships?

I will certainly tell him that. Thubten Samdup, the Dalai Lama’s northern Europe representative, said that the First Minister had “buckled” under pressure from the Chinese Government in relation to the Dalai Lama. The Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister met the Dalai Lama, whereas the First Minister did not. The United Kingdom Government has shown that it is possible to be firm and clear with China on human rights and Tibet while nurturing strong economic links. They were prepared to be firm with the Chinese while working with them. The last time the First Minister visited China, all he did was give the Chinese Government a book. To send a clear message to China, will the First Minister commit today to meet the Dalai Lama? That is what he could do—if he is listening. Will he commit today to send a clear message and to meet the Dalai Lama at the next possible opportunity?

I thank the cabinet secretary for the advance copy of his statement. He has documented the effective and welcome partnership working that has taken place with the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, Ed Davey, and Alistair Carmichael. People will have found it reassuring that the two Governments were working together in a time of crisis. It is also reassuring to know that talks were under way with potential new buyers. This morning, Joan McAlpine detailed the discussions that the First Minister had with Andrew Ovens from Greenergy in Uphall. She also talked about the way in which those talks were reported to Ineos. Can the finance secretary give the Scottish Government’s official account of those talks?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01603)

In May last year, I asked the First Minister about the closure of fire and police control rooms. He laughed and said that I was “spreading gloom, doom and despondency”.—[Official Report, 31 May 2012; c 9635.] Last week, half the fire control rooms were proposed for closure, and yesterday, as Ruth Davidson has just said, we heard that 65 police stations are to be closed to the public. Instead of laughing, will the First Minister answer this question? There are 10 police emergency control rooms in Scotland. They handle thousands of 999 calls every year and are an essential link in the battle against crime. How many police control rooms does he plan to close?

I am used to the First Minister making up the answers, but I am not used to him making up the questions as well. He does not seem to know what his chief constable is up to. His chief constable plans to close at least seven of the 10 police emergency control rooms across Scotland. Police emergency control rooms in Aberdeen, Glenrothes, Inverness, Dumfries and more will shut. Instead of protecting the fire and police forces, centralisation has led to the asset stripping of local services. Decades of progress have been wiped away with the stroke of a pen. When we had our local democratic police and fire boards, they could put a stop to these damaging closures. The claim that this is nothing to do with the First Minister is claptrap. He sent his minister Fergus Ewing to cut the ribbon and open the fire emergency control room in Aberdeen. Is he planning to send Fergus Ewing back round to close the control rooms and the police stations, turn off the lights and lock the doors, or will the First Minister step in? Will he put an end to this?

The Government initially included mitigation measures in article 17(6), but I am puzzled and disconcerted that they have been removed with only a promise from the minister. However good he is, he could be replaced tomorrow and those assurances could be dispensed with. I hope that the member agrees that those mitigation measures should be included in the order. My other concern is that the process has been salami sliced with the marine licensing process considering major parts of the environmental impact, including dredging of the Forth in a special protection area. Does the member consider those as important factors and that the order should therefore be rejected?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01584)

On Monday, I met John Young from Patna in Ayrshire to see for myself the devastation left by Scottish Coal at the Dunstonhill opencast mine. The financial shortfall to restore the mines in East Ayrshire alone has risen to an estimated £130 million, and the figure could be higher, as there is a real doubt that all the restoration bonds can be recovered. Despite the growing restoration bill, the council has now given permission to mine for coal at two sites, without there being any bonds or financial guarantees. Hargreaves mining company will not pick up the cost of restoring the sites if the mines fail again. John Young is angry that his community has been ripped off by mining companies and let down by his council and his Government. Will the First Minister step in and stop this reckless behaviour?

There are signs that the industry could fail again. The world coal price remains low and the insurance bond market is closed. The Scottish Government seems incapable of reading those signs. Not only is the Government supporting mining without financial guarantees—the very problem that got us into this situation in the first place—but I have discovered that its own agency, Scottish Enterprise, is proposing to give taxpayers’ money to Hargreaves mining company. Public funds are going to an industry that has already ripped us off. Surely it is time to call a halt to this environmental injustice and economic madness. Will the First Minister act now, or will he sit idle while the companies rip us and our environment off again?

Given that we might expect this and future Governments to make some progress on life expectancy in the next 20 years and that Ireland, for example, has a pension age of 68, is it possible that her expert group might report back with a higher pension age?

I am glad to see that the cabinet secretary made it back from Culloden. The cabinet secretary has made a lot of play of the difference between the economic strategies of the Scottish Government and the UK Government. Does he not recognise that the results are exactly the same? He is talking about 90,000-odd extra jobs, but there are 1 million extra jobs in the UK under a strategy that he has dismissed as ineffective. How does he explain the outcomes being exactly the same, even though he says that he has plan B?

How does Mr Swinney explain last month’s rise in unemployment? How does that tie in with his improvement in Scotland?

The finance secretary delivered a wonderful and, on occasion, elegant self-contradiction, and did so without showing any sign of embarrassment. He complained that he does not have the powers that he needs to do his job, yet he proceeded to claim the credit for every bit of improvement that has come about in Scotland. That is an amazing self-contradiction, coming from a finance secretary who claims to have full control of his task. According to the figures, 84,000 extra jobs have been created in Scotland and 1 million in the UK. The figure for Scotland represents an exact Barnett share of the number of jobs that have been created in the UK. If John Swinney wants to take the credit for the marginal differences that he says exist between the situation in Scotland and that in the rest of the UK, while giving credit to the UK Government for the improvements as a whole, we might be able to agree on that, but I suspect that he is trying to take the credit for every job that has been created in Scotland, even though he says that he does not have the necessary powers. The finance secretary’s presentation was embarrassing—he needs to admit when he has not made a difference. The UK has made a difference, and it has done so for a number of reasons. It has not followed the route of the Scottish Government, with its plan MacB; it has stuck to the task of dealing with the deficit.

Not just now. The UK Government has also stuck to the task of making targeted interventions that make a big impact, such as the £1 billion UK youth contract; bringing the corporation tax rate down, to 20 per cent eventually; and the Green Investment Bank, which has £3 billion and is based in Edinburgh.

No. Other initiatives are the new Government-backed business bank; the Technology Strategy Board, with a catapult centre at the University of Strathclyde; and the UK export finance scheme, which has £35 million and hopes to double the support for businesses that export. The UK Government has also provided £100 million for broadband in Scotland.

Not just now. Those are some of the schemes that the UK Government has contributed and that is why an extra 1 million jobs have been created in the UK.

Not just now. Iain Gray is right that, instead of obsessing about independence, the Scottish Government should look at what it can do in Scotland right now. For a start, it could reverse the cuts to Scotland’s colleges. We have asked repeatedly for that and we have raised it repeatedly with John Swinney in budget discussions. I hope that we can make a bit more progress this year. The £25 million cut had a detrimental effect on our colleges—80,000-plus part-time courses were lost. That is having a big impact on skills, which affects our economy. The Scottish Government could also embrace a new initiative from the UK Government—the £2,000 national insurance contribution employment allowance. We could use that fund in Scotland for several thousand companies that would benefit; many small companies could benefit significantly and even more would be taken out of NICs altogether. We need to make an effort on apprentices, because the comparison between the percentage of companies that take on apprentices in Scotland and the percentage that do so in England does not bear well for Scotland—the figure is only 12 per cent in Scotland but 14 per cent in England. We therefore need to do much more. That is why the NIC employment allowance could make a contribution. We in the Parliament and the Government should encourage companies to take on an apprentice so that we can get the rates up to the levels that are being achieved in England. Those are two actions that the Scottish Government could take to contribute to the improvement in the economy across the UK.

I am sure that Margo MacDonald recognises that we have cut the deficit by a third since 2010. That is significant progress that others said should not or could not be done. They were wrong, and we were right to stick to our plan. We need to recognise that Scotland gains significantly from being part of the United Kingdom—Mr Swinney is not keen to emphasise that. The £45 billion export trade to the rest of the UK is valuable to Scotland. Putting up any kind of barrier would be detrimental to that. We get economic strength from being part of the UK. Bailing out the banks at a time of crisis was good for Scotland and for the UK, and it was delivered by our being part of the UK. We have a shared currency. If Scotland handed over to a foreign country control of its interest rates, that would not be good for the Scottish economy. We have a broad financial base in the United Kingdom, which can support the economy in Scotland. The overreliance on oil in Scotland would be detrimental to our finances, as the National Institute of Economic and Social Research has highlighted. It said that a consequence of independence would be higher bond rates for Scotland. It is clear that we need to recognise the value that we have and the contribution that has been made to improving the economy and that we need to reject independence.

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I just wanted to say that it is better than the bugs that Kevin Stewart was talking about.

Will the minister give way?

No, it is fine.

Does the minister think that taxpayers’ money should be used to fund the legacy that has been left by a failed coal mining industry? Does he think that that is a good use of public funds?

Patrick Harvie and I have come together today to try to amend the Government’s motion, and I have returned from my party’s conference in Glasgow to participate in the debate. Those are two unusual steps, but they are necessary to make the case against the Government’s misguided actions. I apologise to the chamber for not being able to stay for the summation of the debate, as I am required back in Glasgow.

In a second. Far from getting tough with the industry, as we have read in the papers and heard in the news this morning, the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism needs a reality check. He is desperately propping up failing mines. That risks further environmental damage, to compound the damage to which communities have already been exposed. I support the Scottish Government’s renewable energy and climate change ambitions, with world-beating targets. However, after my experience of the Scottish Government’s failure to meet the past two sets of annual targets and now its approach to the collapse of the opencast coal mining industry, I am beginning to doubt its commitment to the environment. The world price of coal has dropped as a result of American operators dumping coal on the world market because of the dramatic increase in fracking in the United States. The technology that is used in fracking looks as if it will be extended rather than limited in the years ahead, which could depress coal prices further. Even if the price does not go down, it is unlikely to increase sufficiently to deliver a long-term resurgence for the industry here. The industry knows that, and so does its insurance market. That is why Hargreaves has created hivecos for each of its sites. Hivecos are small entities that do not contaminate the wider Hargreaves company if they fail. It is clear that Hargreaves does not have the confidence to take the mines involved directly into its company; it wants to keep them at one remove in case of a future collapse.

The minister is wrong: that would not be the effect of the amendment, which—as he knows—relates only to new applications. He is trying to misinterpret what the amendment says. Hargreaves is limiting its liability by creating the hivecos, so that if they collapse there will be no effect on the wider company. That does not inspire me with confidence. If Hargreaves had confidence in the sector, it would have taken the mines into its operations fully and not half-heartedly.

No, not just now. That is also why the insurance companies have, to a great extent, closed the bond market for opencast coal. They know that there is a high chance of companies collapsing again, and they believe that the risk is far too high. We should hear their warnings—we need to listen to what those people have to say—but it seems that the Government is not prepared to listen to them. It is desperate of the Government to keep the industry alive even though that creates more significant problems for the future. The problems just now are already severe. There are mines dotted across the country that have been left derelict, with polluted water and massive spoil heaps that dwarf communities. The failed coal companies did not put enough bonds or sufficient funds in place to cover the restoration costs. A report that was published last week showed that the situation in East Ayrshire is now far worse than was first thought. The minister did not mention that situation—which I think deserves recognition—in his opening remarks. In west Fife, five years ago, I was repeatedly told—

Not just now. I was repeatedly told that the lessons of the past had been learned. Planning applications were granted and new opencast mines were opened, but five years later many mines have been left derelict. That is not acceptable. The Scottish Government seems determined—

Not just now. The Scottish Government seems determined to ignore those lessons again. That is why I am concerned that it is seeking to provide financial assistance to Hargreaves through Scottish Enterprise—

Not just now. I would like to hear what the minister has to say in his summing up—I will look at the Official Report later—about Scottish Enterprise’s financial contribution to Hargreaves. Whatever the sum is, I question—

If the minister can explain, that would be helpful.

That is a huge distraction by the minister, who does not recognise that he has failed to learn the lessons of the past. He needs to look to the past to learn lessons for the future, but he refuses to do so. The minister is also looking at trying to get money through the licensing fees that have been paid to the UK Government. That money could be used for other things, but the minister wants to use it to pay for the legacy—the failed legacy—of the mining industry in Scotland. He wants to clear up the companies’ mess and give them more money to create more mess in the future. That is a very short-sighted attempt—

I am afraid that I am running out of time. Of course I want us to clean up the mines, but we should not do so at the cost of the future environmental legacy. The minister should be working to resolve those problems. The pay-as-you-extract scheme shifts responsibility from the industry to other people. If we do not get sufficient funds together from the scheme that the minister proposes, we will end up with the state or communities having to pick up the tab for future failure. I have some simple asks for the minister. He needs to recognise that—as with the situation in East Ayrshire—we need an independent inquiry into the collapse of the industry. All new planning applications should be halted, the pay-as-you-extract scheme should be abandoned and no public funds should be invested in Hargreaves. If the Government wants to restore its environmental reputation, which has been severely damaged by this episode, it needs to take those reasonable steps. I move amendment S4M-07712.1, to leave out from “contribution” to end and insert: “environmental destruction caused by the open cast coal mining industry in Scotland; notes that the costs of restoring current and former open cast sites far exceed the sums available through restoration bonds; notes that the market for coal mined in Scotland is declining as renewable technologies are adopted and emissions restrictions are introduced; believes that an independent inquiry is needed into the regulation of this industry and that no public money should be spent further subsidising an unsustainable industry with a record of evading its responsibilities; considers that a low-carbon economy can only be one that reduces and ultimately ends its economic reliance on fossil fuels, rather than seeking to exploit all possible sources, and calls on the Scottish Government to call an immediate halt to all new open cast coal developments and to ensure that the industry fulfils its legal and moral obligation to society by bearing the full cost of the necessary environmental restoration.”

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01549)

A few days ago, the chair of the patient safety board of the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh raised concerns that hospital care is substantially worse at weekends than on weekdays. For example, at Hairmyres hospital in Lanarkshire, the death rate among patients who are admitted for vascular surgery on a Saturday is more than 41 per cent compared with 16 per cent for those admitted on a Tuesday. At Dundee’s Ninewells hospital, the rate for Saturdays was more than 21 per cent, which is almost double the rate for Thursdays. In Fife hospitals, the rates for renal patients admitted at weekends are higher than for those admitted on weekdays. Has the First Minister been able to consider that issue?

I know that we have to be careful, but we have a duty to ask serious questions about these issues to satisfy ourselves that patients are being kept as safe as possible. Simon Paterson-Brown, who is consultant general surgeon at Edinburgh royal infirmary and chair of the patient safety board at the Royal College of Surgeons, has said: “It could well be the weekend mortality rates in some medical specialities are not statistically significant. But on the other hand they could be and, unless we are fully investigating this, I don’t think anyone can say with certainty either way. I intend to take this further.” I recognise that there are processes in place to look at such issues, but I think that we need some reassurance about what surgeons are saying, because these are not insignificant people—this is from the Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. When will the First Minister publish a report in response to the surgeons’ concerns?

I thank the finance secretary for early sight of his statement. He knows that we will work with him in a constructive way to amend his budget. Remarkably, in his statement today he made no mention of the rise in unemployment. Instead, he calls it a budget for independence. It has the wrong priorities and contains the wrong choices, and it is an inadequate response. Let us look at colleges. Since 2009, 80,000 part-time places have been cut, but his budget goes nowhere near repairing that damage. Fewer businesses in Scotland have apprenticeships than anywhere else in the United Kingdom. The UK Government’s £2,000 cut in national insurance should be promoted by the Scottish Government in order to recruit more apprentices. I have repeatedly been disappointed by the finance secretary’s stubborn refusal to adopt our costed plans for 24,000 families with two-year-old children. The Education and Culture Committee heard yesterday about the benefits that that could deliver for families. On colleges, apprentices and two-year-olds, will the finance secretary agree to look again at his plans?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01521)

This week, 130,000 two-year-olds have been able to go through the doors of nurseries in England to start their free education. How many two-year-olds are receiving free education in Scotland?

The First Minister does not seem to recognise that the child to staff ratios in Scotland are the worst on these islands, and have been throughout his whole term of office. It is surprising that he does not seem to know how many two-year-olds are receiving free education in Scotland, because I suspect that he knew that I was going to ask the question. This is something that he has the powers to do today. He does not have to wait for independence, but he is going to give two-year-olds what they need only when he gets what he wants. The First Minister has chosen to deny children in Scotland something that children in England are getting. Members: Oh! The SNP back benchers should listen, because that provision is changing the life chances of children in England but is being denied to children in Scotland. Will the First Minister change his mind, or is he going to continue to be the stubborn First Minister that he has always been, on the issue?

Every morning on my way to my son’s school, I would meet J T Murphy out for his morning stroll. As an old Fife coal miner from deep working class roots in Lochore, J T was not someone one would imagine to be a natural Conservative supporter. However, he was a David McLetchie supporter. J T liked his straight talking and forensic style and, every single day, he would tell me how good David was. Such was David’s widespread appeal. I, too, liked David. I only really got to know him as a fellow member of the Scotland Bill Committee. James Kelly, Richard Baker and I would work closely with David, tapping into his knowledge and understanding of the territory. Often, we would subconsciously—and physically—look to David at committee meetings when faced with an unexpectedly tricky issue, and I am sure that our collective sighs of relief were audible when he came up with an inspired response to a difficult question. Occasionally, however, he would say nothing, with a wicked glint in his eye. We would scrabble around and, panicking, attempt to conjure up some kind of answer that would pale into significance beside David’s own answer. Such was David’s sense of humour. Earlier this year, we paid tribute to another pillar of this Parliament, Brian Adam, who was credited with helping to make minority government work for the first time in Holyrood when all had expected it to fail. David McLetchie deserves equal praise for his role in ensuring that it worked. As the business manager for the Conservatives, he was able to reach out and build relationships with others that ensured that the business could get done. That feat was even more remarkable because he had previously been in regular combat with the SNP as the leader of the Scottish Conservatives. Such were David’s versatility and intelligence. David was a towering figure who changed the future for the Scottish Conservatives and Scottish politics. Such were David’s widespread appeal, his versatility and his intelligence. Such were David’s many talents that he helped to change Scotland. What will we do without David McLetchie? J T Murphy passed away a couple of years ago. David never had the opportunity to meet J T down here, but I like to think that he will get to meet him up there and that they will have a drink and a laugh together.

With more than 50,000 incidents a year, domestic violence is far too prevalent in Scotland. Too many women and men suffer behind closed doors, and often in silence. On this first day of the new parliamentary term, we should signal our renewed determination to root out the problem. I would welcome new proposals from the Government on how we can do more to tackle domestic violence in our country, on education to help people to identify abusive relationships, on reviewing guidelines on prosecution for domestic violence, and on funding for the range of organisations and facilities that support people who find themselves in abusive relationships. I am pleased that the Scottish Parliament will be given an early opportunity to vote on equal marriage. It is a mark of a modern, open, tolerant and liberal society that those who wish to get married can do so. Churches will have the power and the right not to participate in such ceremonies. Individuals will also be protected if they do not wish to conduct such ceremonies, even if their church wants to.

I am. The appropriate measures will be taken at Westminster to introduce changes to the Equality Act 2010, which will protect the individuals about whom John Mason talked. We need to ensure that Scotland joins the nations of the world that have equal marriage on the statute book, because it is a mark of the modern society that I want Scotland to become. I would like the Scottish Parliament to match what is happening on childcare in England. This week, thousands of two-year-olds in England will get the chance—the right—to have 15 hours of nursery education each week. The First Minister has denied Scottish children that, but he could change all that. He could concede that Professor James Heckman is right when he says that the best education investment takes place before the age of three. There is an opportunity to improve young people’s life chances through education. If the First Minister wanted to, he could include such a proposal in his legislative programme. In his statement, the First Minister spent much time on outlining new—and sometimes old—initiatives on community empowerment, which is close to my heart. I am sure that we will look carefully at the proposals that he makes, and that we will support measures to give communities more powers. However, the reality and the record are something different, after the centralisation of our police and fire services, which was one of the biggest transfers of power from local government to central Government since devolution—so much for community empowerment. Recent news has shown that the economy is on the mend and that we are moving towards recovery. This morning, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development gave a positive assessment of growth. Substantial progress has been made on the UK Government’s plan to cut the deficit, which has since 2010 reduced by a third as a percentage of gross domestic product. Significant progress has been made in the past year on job creation and reducing unemployment. Although the Scottish figures wobble from month to month, it is clear that we are benefiting from the 1 million new private sector jobs that have been created across the UK. The challenges that are faced by the hundreds of thousands of people in Scotland who are still out of work need to be met by our two Governments working together. I support much of what the Scottish Government does on growth and employment, but it is important that it and its agencies promote the UK schemes that are available in Scotland, too. For example, the UK Commission for Employment and Skills survey shows that there are fewer companies in Scotland with apprentices than there are in the rest of the UK. Scottish businesses will get £2,000 off their national insurance from next April because of the changes that the UK Government is making. I want ministers in both Governments to promote that so that small businesses think about using the savings to take on an apprentice or another employee. I also want to hear Scottish ministers telling Scottish companies about the £1 billion youth contract that provides businesses with up to £2,275 per person for a job, training or work experience, and about the funding-for-lending scheme and the business bank, which will provide billions of pounds of low-cost capital. There is also the UK enterprise capital fund, which is worth £200 million, and the annual investment allowance for plant and machinery, which is being increased from £25,000 to £250,000 for two years. The UK Green Investment Bank, which is based in Edinburgh, has £3.8 billion-worth of UK Government money to help to unblock the financing of renewables projects. It is my hope that the Scottish Government will work closely with the UK Government to maximise those opportunities for Scotland. The next 12 months will set the course of this country for the next 300 years and more. The power that is vested in the hands of the people who live in our great nation is immense. I am in no doubt that everyone in this chamber wants the best for Scotland; we just disagree on how we want to achieve it. My support for a strong Scottish Parliament with home rule in a strong partnership with the United Kingdom is on the record. The stakes are high and the risks are great, but the opportunity of a renewed constitutional settlement within the UK is within our grasp.

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. In March, during a debate on policing, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice told the Parliament: “High-level agreement on corporate functions was reached at the SPA board meeting on 18 January. There was further dialogue on the detail and staff designations were agreed at the SPA board meeting last Friday”— that is, 8 March— “I am sure that all members will join me in welcoming that agreement.”—[Official Report, 13 March 2013; c 17671.] Within the past hour, we learned from the chairman of the Scottish Police Authority—here, in Parliament—that the arrangements were agreed only yesterday and that the SPA has still not finalised the role description for its chief executive, let alone started recruiting. We know that the interim chief executive resigned in February and that as a result the SPA must recruit a second interim chief executive. The position is the exact opposite of the orderly situation that the justice secretary described. I do not think that Parliament would have voted to support the justice secretary’s welcome in March if he had been clear with us about the turmoil in the organisation. Is there time this afternoon for the justice secretary to come to Parliament to explain himself? [Interruption.]

I, too, support Gavin Brown’s eminently sensible amendment 9. We are not suggesting that in every single year a year’s notice should be given for any changes. We are suggesting that that should happen in the first year, to provide greater certainty for the sector. As we know, the construction sector has gone through significant difficulties in recent years, and we should try to reduce as far as possible the uncertainty that might be caused by the situation. Gavin Brown’s suggestion is eminently sensible. As the finance secretary said this morning, there is a difference of only five months between what he suggests and what Gavin Brown suggests. That gap is not unbridgeable. I suggest that the finance secretary listens to the evidence that has been set out and that he agrees with Gavin Brown.

John Mason’s last point was interesting, because he is implying that we are really only interested in carbon emissions in relation to the smaller, less expensive houses. I think that the opposite is the case. We should be looking to tackle climate change wherever the emissions come from. That, to me, is the most important aspect of what we are trying to do. Some of the biggest houses emit some of the greatest amounts of carbon. Therefore, I support Patrick Harvie’s amendment. I think that it gives us an opportunity to change the way in which we view buildings. When people buy and sell properties, they should think not only of the value of the property but also of its long-term, sustainable future and how much it will cost to run it, part of which should involve a consideration of tax. That would be a valuable way in which to proceed, and the fact that the proposal does not deal with every house in the country does not mean that it is not worth proceeding with. It seems to be an eminently sensible way of focusing people’s minds and getting them to think about the energy efficiency of their properties, just in case they want to sell at some point in the future. Further, including this proposal in the bill does not prevent other measures from coming forward in other bills. A variety of different measures can be introduced by the Government. I support the amendment in Patrick Harvie’s name, and urge the Government to support it too.

It is interesting that the independence revolution starts with LBTT. That is obviously the most revolutionary development that has happened in the Parliament and I look forward to joining John Mason on that fantastic, exciting journey. Many members have mentioned that the bill is historic—it is a landmark. The bill has been greeted with great enthusiasm. However, we should not forget that it is part of the powers in the Scotland Act 2012, which many ministers described as a poison pill and which they threatened to veto. Many red lines were drawn and then painted over with Tipp-Ex. Now we have the bill. I welcome it, because I am in favour of more powers for the Parliament. However, we should not forget that those who are enthusiastic about the bill today threatened its introduction. We should not forget that those who are in favour of more powers sometimes adopt strange positions. For such a historic bill, we have adopted quite a timid approach to its implementation. We could have implemented something quite interesting to incentivise people in relation to the environment. We could have made significant steps today. However, that approach was turned down, which is a shame. I hope that the Government reflects on that and introduces measures in other areas to address the climate change targets that we have missed on two successive occasions. I do not want to be completely negative this afternoon. I welcome the replacement of the slab structure with something that is more in line with the income tax proposals. That is a sensible, progressive way to proceed. However, I am disappointed that the finance secretary did not listen to Gavin Brown’s wise words and introduce much more notice for business and others of how the tax will be structured. There is still an opportunity for him to indicate that he will do that. I hope that he does, but I might be disappointed, too.

The cabinet secretary might find this difficult to believe, but partnership is not a bad idea. He finds it increasingly difficult, as we saw today in his rejection of Gavin Brown’s sensible suggestions. I work together with those of like mind; the cabinet secretary just seems to reject them.

Will the minister give way?

Does the minister deny that he described the Scotland Act 2012 provisions as a “poison pill” and dangerous and that he was prepared to veto the bill? He had six red lines; however, those red lines completely disappeared. Will he not admit that?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01478)

Four years ago, I joined families in the little settlement of Kinneddar Park in west Fife who were against proposals to extract coal from the neighbouring fields. We lost, and permission was granted. The residents were assured by developers that the industry had learned lessons from past failures and that, after extraction, the land would be converted into a local environmental resource. Operations have now ceased, leaving a huge hole and spoil heaps dwarfing the area. The families at Kinneddar Park have been let down, and thousands of families across Scotland, from Ayrshire through Lanarkshire and Midlothian to Fife, are suffering similarly. Mining companies were supposed to buy insurance bonds to pay for land restoration, but there is a huge deficit and insufficient funds are available to restore all the eyesores. Given the scale of the problem, will the First Minister order an independent inquiry into this failure?

I welcome the First Minister’s understanding of the situation, but local authorities have the powers now to enforce appropriate restoration bonds. It is not as if they are deprived of the powers that would suddenly resolve the problem. The First Minister referred to the work of Fergus Ewing, whom I commend for the work that he is doing in the coal task force. However, that is primarily looking at the needs of the business side. The proposed restoration trust has no real bite and is, in fact, a more convenient alternative to restoration bonds for the industry, which would risk further environmental problems in the future. While some companies have made millions, communities have been left environmentally bankrupt. The industry is now seeking to dump opencast sites for other people to clean up—Kinneddar Park is one of them. Communities have endured years of noise, dust and heavy transport, and they now fear a legacy of derelict sites, polluted water and scarred landscapes. I encourage and urge the First Minister to set up an independent inquiry, as communities were promised that the mistakes of the past would not be repeated, but they were. For the sake of the families at Kinneddar Park and many others, will the First Minister act?

I thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of his statement. The cabinet secretary has again lectured us about the need to spend more but, for the second year running, he has taken a nine-figure sum out of his budget and put it into the following year’s budget. That is delayed spending, not accelerated spending. On capital spend, the Scottish Futures Trust underspent by £300 million. It demanded the fossil fuel levy for energy but then failed to spend that. If any other body did that, it would be accused of sucking money out of the economy. Will the cabinet secretary detail what shovel-ready projects that capital underspend will be spent on?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01458)

When I asked before about divisions within the police, the First Minister laughed and said that it was creative tension. Was he laughing when the chief executive of the Scottish Police Authority resigned in February? The First Minister told me that matters had been resolved, but we now discover that chaos continued at the heart of our newly centralised police force. Why did he not tell the Parliament about the resignation of that senior public leader? That stinks of a cover-up. Why was the Parliament not informed of the resignation of the authority’s chief executive? Just what did the First Minister have to hide?

The First Minister cannot hide behind the Police Authority’s operational independence. As Andrea Quinn’s letter points out, the Scottish Government has been involved every step of the way on the structure of the new Police Authority. The chief executive was going, but the matter was kept quiet. As a result, we will be without a permanent chief, and we have had three chief executives in just one year. If that is continuity, I do not know what not having continuity is. Why was the recruitment process not started earlier? The First Minister told me that the chaos was sorted in January. Then, in February, Andrea Quinn resigned. We led a police debate in March, but Parliament was not told about that. Did the Government ask the chairman to keep the resignation quiet to avoid embarrassment? Did the Government tell Vic Emery to keep that quiet?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01416)

Scottish National Party MSPs say that they are prepared to back the closure of their local court in return for a new justice centre for their area. The courts at Cupar, Peebles, Dingwall, Arbroath, Stonehaven and Rothesay have histories that stretch back 500 years. With only 12 days before the Parliament decides those courts’ future, will the First Minister tell those back benchers when and where the new justice centres will be built?

I expected some sort of explanation about the new justice centres, but nothing was forthcoming. It is ridiculous that the First Minister does not have worked-out plans for the justice centres. He cannot give us even one single date and one location for those justice centres, which his back benchers say will come. He already has a justice centre in Cupar, but he plans to shut it down. He already has one, but that is what he will do. Last week, we heard from the Scottish Court Service that more courts could close before any justice centres are built. This week, the Law Society of Scotland spoke out. The clock is ticking. There are 12 days for SNP members of the Justice Committee to make a big decision on whether to back their Government or back their community—whether to back 500 years of local service against the Government’s cavalier and chaotic approach. Would it not be safer for SNP members to stand up for their communities and reject the First Minister’s court closures?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01399)

I associate myself and my party with the First Minister’s remarks about Woolwich. Last night’s attack was sickening and can never be condoned. Our thoughts are with the victim’s family. What discussions has the First Minister had with the Home Secretary, the chief constable in Scotland, military chiefs and the United Kingdom security services following last night’s attack? Some steps have been taken on security around military installations and other sensitive buildings. What steps has the First Minister taken in response to last night’s events?

I thank the First Minister for his very helpful answer. I am sure that he agrees that it is important that fear must not turn into hate in such circumstances. I will do all that I can to work with him to keep peace between and within our communities. These were not the actions of Britain’s Muslim community; it feels as wounded by the attack as anyone else. Will the First Minister report back to the Parliament in due course once we have had time to consider the consequences of this attack for Scotland, so that we have an opportunity to reflect on and explore what we should do?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement and his work on the issue. I am a member of the task force, but I have not yet been able to attend its meetings, much to my regret. I see no reference in the minister’s statement to a replacement for restoration bonds. I have been very concerned about proposals to introduce a kind of pay-as-you-extract scheme to replace the bonds, in which companies would pay a fee for the coal that they extract, which might not match the full cost of restoration. If a company collapses just before it extracts any coal, there might not be any funds left to restore the big hole that would have been ripped out of the landscape. Will the minister set out his thoughts on that matter and whether he has reached a conclusion?

I have had numerous pieces of correspondence from constituents about the issue, including from Sue Cumming, who said: “I am disabled, and I would definitely prefer to have a talented and caring hairdresser like Dougie see me at home than struggle with the journey to Edinburgh.” When there is such a clear impact on patients and customers, does the cabinet secretary not feel that he has a responsibility to investigate why we are in this position?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01356)

The Deputy Prime Minister is in Essex today, promoting the United Kingdom Government’s expansion of nursery education to thousands of two-year-olds. In Aberdeen, the First Minister is restricting plans to around 40 children. Under the affordable plans that I put to him, 1,040 children would secure a nursery place in Aberdeen. Is it not a shame that so many two-year-olds in Essex will get help but those in Aberdeen will not? Is it not a shame that he cannot go anywhere in Scotland and make that sort of commitment?

I anticipated that the First Minister would think that I would not ask that question—[Laughter.]

I wonder whether there will ever be a week in which the First Minister does not use an excuse to do absolutely nothing for two-year-olds. The First Minister seems to be taking a leaf out of Homer Simpson’s book. Homer Simpson said: “If something’s hard to do, it’s not worth doing.” It is quite remarkable that, while the UK Government battles to improve the life chances of two-year-olds, the First Minister does nothing—[Interruption.]

He does nothing but raise the white flag. He has excuse after excuse for doing absolutely nothing. It is good enough for two-year-olds in Essex, so why is it not good enough for two-year-olds in Aberdeen?

3. I, too, recognise those who have lost their lives serving their country in Afghanistan. Our thoughts are with their families and friends at this difficult time. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01341)

Dennis Canavan, Jim Fairlie, Patrick Harvie, Gordon Wilson and Jim Sillars all reject the First Minister’s plans to join a British currency union. When her policies came under pressure from her own side, Margaret Thatcher said: “You turn if you want to. The lady’s not for turning.” Now that he has dug in on his British currency plan, is the First Minister transforming into the Mrs Thatcher of Scottish politics, or is he for turning?

An interesting lack of an answer. DeAnne Julius, a founding member of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee—the committee on which the First Minister is relying to deliver his plans for the British currency union—gave the First Minister another warning this morning. Last week, Professor John Kay—one of the First Minister’s favourite advisers—rejected his plans as well. Further, the First Minister cannot dismiss all of his friends in the yes camp, who are telling him no. DeAnne Julius said that if the First Minister wanted the option of a Scottish currency, he would need to wobble now. He is under pressure from friend and foe to wobble. Is he wobbling?

Brian Adam made a bit of a habit of bucking the trend, of being ahead of the pack and of making a difference. He did it his way, and he certainly made a difference. It is not common for scientists to cross into politics, and there are not many in the Parliament today, but Brian bucked the trend—he was one of those scientists. He was a proud one, too, with qualifications in biochemistry and clinical pharmacology, which led him from the University of Aberdeen to Glaxo in Montrose, and on to City hospital in Aberdeen. Brian and I first met when he provided me with great assistance in establishing an annual event for scientists to come together and have dialogue with politicians at Our Dynamic Earth. He was always willing to help and was always keen to stand up for science. Brian also bucked the trend in elections. I am an election geek, and I like looking at numbers. Let us consider the results for Aberdeen North in 2003. I know well that parties go through ups and downs, and the Scottish National Party was on a wee bit of a down at that time, but Brian managed to secure a win from Labour. He transferred that result—a majority of 500—to a majority of 7,000 in subsequent elections. In every successive election, he increased his majority. That told me that he was respected and valued by local people. Brian won against the odds at that time. Brian was a true champion for the north-east, and local people respected and valued him there. We also respected and valued him here. Together with Bruce Crawford, Brian skilfully piloted his party through minority administration. That had never been done before in this Parliament, and it is rarely done in other Parliaments—it often leads to chaos. Here, however, it was very calm, in part due to Brian’s skill and determination. He made a success of it, and he did so in his own gentle but firm characteristic way. He was quite a man; he was quite a character. I am sure that bucking trends was quite tiring, but what impressed me most throughout was that he managed to remain a good and decent man, a man of whom his family and friends will forever be proud. In the worlds of science, elections and Parliament and, most of all, at home, Brian was valued and appreciated. We need more people like Brian in politics—trusted, respected and good. He was a member whom the Parliament will remember for a very long time, long after he is gone. Brian Adam: a good man who bucked the trend.

Will the member give way?

It might be considered as friendly fire. I, too, congratulate the SCVO on its support for the voluntary sector. The Liberal Democrats do not have a speaking slot in this debate, but I wanted to lend our support to Gavin Brown’s efforts for three-year funding. There is an increasing focus on preventative measures and early intervention. Does Gavin Brown think that three-year funding would help those efforts to secure those long-term goals?

How many years is a few years? How long would people have to wait for that justice centre?

SNP back benchers have obviously been promised a shiny new justice centre in each of their constituencies. Can the minister tell us more about that?

The minister will recognise that there was quite a lot of opposition to the development of opencast mining in certain communities. Although the reputation of the industry is improving, it was poor in the past. What assurances can the minister give me that he will ensure that that reputation is restored? Without that, we will not have an opencast industry for people locally to support.

Many of the witnesses who gave evidence to the committee said that they supported some reform. Did the committee consider what types of reform people would prefer to see?

The cabinet secretary mentions the £1.6 billion that is highlighted in the report. Does that mean that she is opposed to all those reforms? That is the implication of what she said.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The member spoke about not being opposed to reforms, but what kind of reforms would she envisage that she was not able to deliver in 13 years in government?

Will the member take an intervention?

I try not to make a habit of it—and I advise members not to make a habit of it—but I happened to read a press statement from Jamie Hepburn this morning. He said: “Labour is terrified of saying anything substantial on welfare”. My colleagues in the Conservative Party and I have asked members numerous times to give their own ideas about welfare reform. Although they all say that they are in favour of reform and not opposed to it, not one idea has been given.

I will be happy to take an intervention from Mr Stewart in a second. I am quite happy to give up all of my six minutes for members to tell me what reforms they will make and how much they will save. We can start with Kevin Stewart.

That sounds as if it would cost more money, not less.

Yes.

Well, an exemption sounds as if it would cost money.

That is very commendable. In fact, Danny Alexander has invested more in trying to close those loopholes and catch those people. However, what Mark McDonald has suggested is not a welfare reform. Three members intervened and gave not one single idea that would save money. They live in a bubble and do not understand the consequences.

Yes. Let us see whether Drew Smith has anything.

We have had four interventions and no suggestions for savings.

In a second. I ask Mr Harvie to let me answer Mr Smith’s intervention before I come to him. [Interruption.] It will take up to six minutes. Mr Smith has not identified a saving. He has identified something that he would like to change in our welfare reform programme. If members can come up with any ideas—

In a second. Members have highlighted that the impact of welfare reform on Scotland would be £1.6 billion. That implies that they would reverse all £1.6 billion-worth of savings. The bedroom tax represents £50 million out of that £1.6 billion. Therefore, even if we acceded to what Mr Smith alludes to, we would save only a fraction of what the UK Government plans to save.

Yes. Let us see whether Mr Harvie can come up with something.

That is certainly worthy of consideration, but the member needs to be aware of the balance between encouraging people to invest in the private rented sector, which is trying to improve its standards, and rent controls. Those things are not a one-way street; they need to be considered in the round. Five members have made interventions, but there has not been one single suggestion. I believe in welfare reform, in making work pay and in trying to get the budget under control, but I also believe—this is an important principle—that the welfare system is a safety net for those who are in need. Members constantly complaining in the chamber about the changes does not help. They have come up with not one single change that will save money.

As I said, they have come up with not one single change that will save money. If they cannot commit to reforms, their complaints are just spineless and do not reflect the needs of people who are in need. I have been working to deal with issues such as the bedroom tax, which Mr Smith mentioned; indeed, I have probably had more discussions about the bedroom tax than almost anybody in the Parliament. I am therefore fully aware of the issues. I have met many people who are anxious about the reforms, but politicians cannot run away from their responsibilities to the welfare state and people who are in need.

Will Linda Fabiani give way?

Will Linda Fabiani give way?

Will the member give way?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01302)

I was pleased to see that the Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, which was published today, proposes expanded provision for nursery education for three and four-year-olds so that provision here will roughly match provision in England. However, I was disappointed to see that two-year-olds in Scotland will still be left behind. At this late stage, will the First Minister see sense and provide nursery education for 24,000 two-year-olds in Scotland?

An investigation of the First Minister’s claims about ratios from his own documentation that was published this morning shows that he has omitted to tell us that ratios in Scotland have been poorer than ratios in England for the whole time for which he has been First Minister, so he should not lecture anyone any more about that. The reality is that, this week, thousands of parents across England are queueing up for 15 hours of nursery education for their two-year-olds. Scottish parents and children are being denied that opportunity by this Government. Rather than settling for the timid Children and Young People (Scotland) Bill, will he be bold and match England on two-year-olds?

I share many of the ambitions that the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth has set out, but I want to have confidence that we can sustain such policies into the future. Others have argued for 10-year projections on many policies. Will the cabinet secretary agree to that today?

What the cabinet secretary said is puzzling. If he is relying so much on the independent budget review, why did he reject so many of the review panel’s recommendations, which were based on sustainability?

Gavin Brown is right when he says clearly that the debate is about choices. All members of the Parliament know that they get elected to it to make choices. The choice is not between targeted benefits and universalism, because we have a mixture of targeted and universal support—that is clear. However, the SNP wants us to believe that the choice is between my party, the Conservatives and the Labour Party, which are against universalism, and the SNP, which alone is in favour of it. That is patently not the case. I have a clear example. In England this week, mothers and fathers are investigating whether their two-year-old children will be eligible for free nursery education in September. Parents who are out of work and receiving benefits will be able to apply, and it could change those kids’ life chances. The service is not universal—it is targeted—but it is a good thing to have. Everyone seems to welcome that, apart from the SNP, despite the Liberal Democrats laying out costed plans.

Not just now. The SNP has made the choice that I described. I criticise the SNP for it and I do not believe that it is rejecting the plans because of some golden principle. The SNP seems to believe that universalism is a golden principle. However, let us look at what the SNP Government is doing right now. It is charging for essential dental treatment. This morning, I looked at some of the charges that are being made. Check-ups are free, but root canal treatment is £37 and a single crown is £68. That is basic dental care and the NHS is charging for it—it is not universally free. Eye treatment is exactly the same. Along with the Liberal Democrats, Ken Macintosh was a member of the Government that introduced free eye tests, but treatment, glasses and contact lenses are all charged for, so they are not free and universal services. However, I do not hear the SNP describing them as a tax on short-sighted people or a tax on teeth. Why do we not hear that claim?

Not just now. In John Swinney’s area, Perth and Kinross Council charges for services that I regard as essential, such as home care. It charges £11.47 per hour for home care. The support is targeted; those who have the means pay and those who do not have the means can get support. The service that is provided is not universal—it is targeted—and those who can afford to pay should pay. That is a good thing, but it means that the service is not universal, and I do not hear the SNP condemning that. The golden principle of universalism does not apply right across the board, so for the SNP to claim that only it can defend universalism, when it charges for many essential services, is false and denies reality. The social contract or social wage is just some kind of fabricated construct. It is a cover for a cobbled-together set of policies that the SNP believes will appeal. I believe that they will appeal but, when we face so many challenges in the world, is it right to force the debate into such a false construct as universal good, targeted bad? That ignores reality. Beyond getting the economy back on track, this country faces the three big sustainability challenges of poverty, age and the environment. We need to focus our attention on those challenges and others—I am sure that other people have other priorities. We need to focus on the return that we get for the investment that we make, rather than believe that universalism is a good thing and that everything else is bad. The working population is not growing as fast as we need it to grow to cope with the ageing population. The poverty in some communities is so entrenched that people in those communities will be destined to remain in poverty unless we break the cycle. We have already missed the first set of climate change targets and we cannot afford to miss more of them in the future. That is another priority for the Government. I accept that freezing the council tax is a good thing in good times, but it does not really address climate change, the demographic challenge or poverty. That is why Gavin Brown is absolutely right when he says that we need 10-year projections so that we can look into the future to see the sustainability of the policies and review them individually and collectively, so that they stay sustainable and continue to address the big challenges that we face on age, climate change and poverty. If we do not address those issues and if we do not look for a sustainable budget rather than a budget for the independence referendum, we will let Parliament and the country down. I move amendment S4M-06225.1, to leave out from “confirms” to end and insert: “recognises the progress being made on cutting the deficit and placing the public finances on a sustainable footing; welcomes help for households in the UK budget, including the biggest ever rise in the income tax threshold, taking 186,000 Scots out of income tax altogether and cutting it by £600 for over two million more, and help with childcare costs for around 210,000 families in Scotland; further recognises the fiscal and demographic challenges facing governments and parliaments across the world and the importance of public service reform; believes that a multi-dimensional approach is required whereby the wider social, economic and environmental benefits from spending on universal services are always taken into account in decision-making, and supports the extension of free childcare to two-year-olds in Scotland to match proposals in the rest of the UK.”

I thought that Bob Doris started off in a very reasonable and consensual way. I was very impressed. He flipped halfway through his speech, but he was very reasonable and sensible in explaining the tax spending and charging responsibilities of Government. I thought that he presented the UK’s tax changes in a very reasonable way and gave credit to us for raising the tax threshold to £10,000. I was very grateful to Bob Doris for doing that.

Bob Doris should never be embarrassed about praising the UK Government for some of its tax changes. He should always be proud of doing so and I will give him any encouragement that he needs at any time for that. I think that in what has been a reasonable debate, three main arguments were drawn out about universalism as a principle and as a policy. One was from Clare Adamson, who talked about buy-in. The argument that, in order for society as a whole to buy in and contribute to taxation, people need to get something back from doing so, is quite compelling. There is a strong argument in favour of things being free in order for people to feel that they are part of that wider society. However, I do not think that we should allow people to believe that other services are not universal. If we concede that only things that were once charged for but are now free are the universal services, that ignores roads, schools, hospitals and the police service, for instance. I regard all those as being universal services that are available to everybody. We have never charged for those services—except, I presume, before the NHS—but people do not regard them as “universal”. As part of the argument, we need to be able to explain to people that universal services go beyond prescription charges, bus services and tuition fees. That is important; however, Clare Adamson made a valid point. Mark McDonald’s point about stigma was also interesting. One of the main arguments for free school meals was that kids seeing their friends getting free meals when they are not getting free meals causes a divide within the school. I accept that part of the argument. However, as Malcolm Chisholm pointed out, most of the welfare benefits that are reserved to Westminster are targeted, not universal, so we need to be careful with that principle. We accept that it is an issue that should be factored into the debate, but it is not an absolute that we would apply at all times, otherwise the cost would be extortionate. The other argument is that it costs more to means test. I am sure that, under some circumstances—perhaps for prescriptions—that is the case. If the overall cost is not significant, means testing may not be of value. However, again, we should not extrapolate that principle from the limited areas that it covers just now, otherwise everything would be free because means testing would be so expensive that it would not be worth doing. Those were important points to raise, but they should not be taken as broader golden principles that should never be breached. Although, as Bob Doris was, everybody has been reasonable in saying that the debate is all about choices, many members have talked about universalism as a principle, but I heard nobody say that the principle of universalism should apply to the services that I mentioned earlier—dental treatment, eye treatment and home care up in Perth and Kinross—or to legal aid, which others have mentioned. Nobody has proposed going further. I take Jamie Hepburn’s point that the debate is perhaps about how far we take universalism. If that had been publicly stated by the First Minister today in his speech to the Scottish Trades Union Congress, I would have more respect for the position. However, the position is being presented as a golden principle that has never been breached and which only the SNP can protect. We know that that is simply not the case; other parties support universal services in many areas, including the NHS, schools, the police, nurseries and roads. Welfare reform has been mentioned by several members. I agree with Christine Grahame about the rhetoric about “strivers and skivers”. I do not buy into that, and it does not help for politicians at Westminster to make the case that such a divide exists. Many people need that safety net and should never be considered as skivers. However, along with Christina McKelvie, Christine Grahame did not propose any change to the welfare budget at Westminster. I accept that a big proportion of the welfare budget is pensions, but the rest of it is welfare and it is very expensive. We need to find a way to reform it. Everybody says that we need to reform it, but nobody says how we should reform it. Those who are not in favour of any reform need to consider that the cost of restoring welfare benefits in Scotland would be £2.5 billion. I have not heard anybody in the chamber today suggest how they would pay for that, although what Parliament has to deal with is how to pay for things. As Graeme Pearson and Liz Smith said, this is about affordability. We need to grapple with the competing and conflicting choices that we face. If we do not do that as a Parliament, we are letting the country down.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01293)

Investing in a child before the age of three can change the child’s life for ever, yet at the weekend I heard the First Minister say that he will delay a transformation in childcare until 2016 at the earliest—he will turn his back on progress until he gets a yes vote. In England, the Government is helping 40 per cent of two-year-olds, which would equate to 24,000 children here in Scotland. That is being done under the same budget constraints as face the First Minister. In England, there is a determination to make a change. Why is the First Minister wielding a veto? Why has he put his referendum before Scotland’s children?

It is no good the First Minister boasting about plans that he has delayed or setting up some kind of sub-committee to look at plans for the future, when others elsewhere on these islands are just getting on with it. Giving children the best start and giving their parents real help is within his power right now. I have shown him—as the finance secretary, who is sitting beside him, knows—costed plans for 24,000 places, but he thinks that a few hundred places is enough. In England, they are doing it all and they are providing better staff—[Interruption.]

Despite what the First Minister says, changes are being made in England. Staff are being paid more and there is an insistence on better qualifications and on higher quality. He could match all that right now. Some 72,000 children could miss out while he delays. He is insisting on refusing to act until he gets his way in the referendum. Why has he become the road block? Why is he the delay?

I am sure that the First Minister is excited by today’s events, but after all the build-up, this looks like one of those occasions where the trailer is more exciting than the movie. It has taken the First Minister almost 700 days to get the Cabinet to agree to the date of the referendum. Why on earth does he think that it will take him less time to break up the country? If the First Minister loses, will he join me and others to develop a new consensus for more powers for the Scottish Parliament in the UK? I favour home rule within the UK. Will he develop his proposals?

John Swinney refers to his fiscal commission and applauds the remarks that it has made. Why does he not follow its cautious advice on oil prices?

John Swinney did not mention Norway in any of his remarks. It, too, takes a cautious approach. It estimates oil at between $80 and $100 a barrel, which is roughly the same as the United Kingdom Government. Why has he ignored Norway on this occasion when he cites it so often?

John Swinney’s leaked Cabinet paper was a good mixture of optimism and caution, but what followed just four days later was pure, unbridled make-believe. It was remarkable that the SNP moved from “considerable uncertainty”, which is a quote from his private paper, to “little doubt” in public just a few days later. We all know that oil prices are volatile, falling and unpredictable, yet the SNP now says that prices will always be high and that oil revenues will always grow and will be predicable. That is make-believe and, privately, SNP members know that. Budget holders are always more cautious when they come to estimate oil. The independent OBR makes cautious predictions because the prices are volatile and unpredictable. The Norwegians, who are often quoted by the SNP, are also cautious and pick broadly similar estimates.

Certainly.

That actually makes my point. The issue is that oil prices are extremely difficult to predict. That is why we have to be cautious, and it is why the Norwegians are cautious. I am surprised that the minister is not taking advice from them as he has done in the past. The difference in recent years between oil revenues at a low point and at their highest point is £11 billion—which happens to be, roughly, the budget of the national health service in Scotland, so the significance of any mistake that we make will be great. Even with high oil prices and revenues, it is quite remarkable that the SNP still celebrates the fact that we are running a deficit. Even at the high point they are celebrating that. I have met few households—

Not at the moment. I have met few households that celebrate spending more money than they receive. That is usually time for serious remedial action in any household, but not with the SNP. SNP members celebrate running a £7.6 billion deficit simply because it is not as bad as their neighbour’s. It is just as well that it is the law in the Parliament that John Swinney has to deliver a balanced budget—God knows what would happen otherwise.

All I hear from the SNP’s benches, day after day after day, is a rejection of any change that the Westminster Government introduces without a single explanation as to how that will be paid for—not one single explanation. The SNP also does not spell out that the Norwegians managed to pay for their oil fund and public services by having higher taxes. We do not hear that in this Parliament, but that is the reality of what Norway does. Again, the SNP ignores the Norwegian advice. We face considerable challenges in Scotland. There are the demographic changes, which Gavin Brown mentioned and which are happening faster than elsewhere in the UK. The demand for services is acute. There is intergenerational poverty. There are huge pockets of poverty in parts of Scotland, which we must tackle. There are the climate change objectives and targets. I am delighted that the Government delivered those targets, but they are strict targets, which require a huge amount of investment. We do not need efforts to be founded on make-believe plans about income from oil, which is volatile, unpredictable and falling. That would let down elderly people and people in need—and the climate. The SNP faces a test in that regard. It needs to consider how it will make its plans add up. The SNP is very good at making promises to groups, but it fails to provide a comprehensive account of how those promises will be paid for—[Interruption.] I heard an SNP member say “welfare”. Welfare reform to make work pay is difficult. The SNP opposes absolutely everything but fails to offer its own suggestions for reform. It promises every group everything, but to reverse the plans would cost £2.5 billion. Pensions reform is necessary, as Mr Swinney said in his paper, in which he alluded to the cost of putting things right. He promises everything to public sector workers, without spelling out how he will pay for what he offers. On defence, the SNP appeals to every community, saying, “We’re on your side”, but fails to spell out the cost. On taxes, it makes promises on air passenger duty, fuel duty, VAT and corporation tax but fails to spell out how it will pay for them.

It is simply not credible to promise every group everything while telling us that it is for a future independent Government to work out how to pay for everything. I move amendment S4M-06016.1, to leave out from “report” to end and insert: “notes in particular the volatility of oil and gas revenues over the last four years, annual changes in which can exceed half the entire cost of the NHS in Scotland; welcomes the strength of the oil and gas industry, including its tens of thousands of jobs in Scotland, all within the UK framework; is disappointed that the Scottish Government continues to delay the publication of an overall assessment of the cost of its policies for an independent Scotland and is disappointed that the Fiscal Commission Working Group did not address this; notes that the Expert Working Group on Welfare and Constitutional Reform has been provided with analysis from Scottish Government officials showing that the welfare costs for Scotland will increase by £1.9bn from the current year to 2017-18; believes that it should be a priority for the Scottish Government, upon receipt of the report of the Expert Working Group on Welfare and Constitutional Reform to publish, before the summer recess, a statement showing the costs of its promises to increase spending and its commitments to reduce taxes; believes that the people of Scotland deserve straight answers to the overall, fundamental question of affordability rather than being strung along by a series of ad hoc commitments deigned to appeal to particular groups yet divorced from any analysis of overall affordability.”

Will the member take an intervention?

On his list of failures—apparently, failures of the UK—will Willie Coffey include the construction of this building?

In a challenging world, optimism is a trait that we should all encourage. As leaders we need to believe that the seemingly impossible can be achieved: that we can turn back the tide of global warming; that everyone, no matter what their background, can have a chance to get on; and that we can deal with poverty and hunger in far-flung parts of the planet. It is good to be optimistic—but when we are putting a budget together it is wise to be cautious. That is why Mr Swinney’s own fiscal commission recommended exactly that; and that is why the Norwegians, too, exercise caution. A sensible mix of optimism and caution is the right formula. Make-believe should never be the basis of our decision making. I understand what Kenny Gibson means when he says that we believe that Scotland is too small and too stupid: that somehow, because we question the SNP’s policy, we no longer believe in the ability of our nation. It is deeply insulting to say to me a Scotsman, and as a Fifer, that I do not believe in the ability of my country. I believe immensely in this country’s ability and that we can punch above our weight within the United Kingdom and in the world. That strength is something of which we should be proud, and I do not regard Kenny Gibson’s comments as worthy of a member of this Parliament. The SNP’s approach is to say, “Nothing bad ever happens.” As we know, the world is a bit more unpredictable than that. Iain Gray’s comments about the contrast between the oil industry of the 1970s and the industry today were interesting.

Not just now. Iain Gray said that where there used to be local exploitation of resources there is now an international business, not just because the industry has built on the strengths and talents of people here but because Britain is open for business. Because Britain is a good place to do business, opportunities can be exploited for Scotland.

Not just now. What Iain Gray said about renewables is right. Renewables present us with an incredible opportunity to deal with climate change. However, the opportunity is based on the resource of energy consumers throughout the UK. The subsidy is there to generate investment in the industry. I support renewables and I recognise that the United Kingdom enables us to maximise the opportunity. Aileen McLeod and Mike MacKenzie cited investment in the North Sea as evidence that we will increase our oil revenues, but they fail to recognise that oil is harder to get at, which means that capital expenditure and operational expenditure go up and the tax take goes down. That is the logical consequence of extra investment in harder-to-get oil. The United Kingdom can provide tax incentives—

Not just now. The UK can do that because oil does not dominate the UK economy. Oil accounts for around 1.5 or 2 per cent of the UK’s economy, but in Scotland the proportion is getting up to 16 per cent. If we make big decisions to create tax incentives, we will take a big financial hit. In the UK, such a hit can be accommodated.

Not just now. Malcolm Chisholm was absolutely right to say that the credit rating of an independent Scotland could be poorer. When the credit-rating agencies assess a country’s credit rating, they take account of the country’s record. Scotland has no track record as an independent nation managing its budget. It is required by law to have a balanced budget, but sticking within the law hardly constitutes a track record. That is why Malcolm Chisholm was right to say that the credit rating of an independent Scotland could go down, which would cost us dear as interest rates would go up. That is the logical consequence of what the SNP proposes. Linda Fabiani and Willie Coffey talked about Norway’s oil fund, but they did not talk about the higher taxes that are a feature of Scandinavian life.

Not just now. The Norwegians have been able to pay for their oil fund and their public services by putting up taxes. Tax rises are not part of the message that we hear from the SNP. The SNP makes all the promises in the world to everyone, but it leaves it to a future Government of an independent Scotland to decide how to pay for everything. People deserve a little more honesty.

John Mason was very brave to criticise the finance secretary for claiming that the GERS figures show that Scotland has a surplus. I suspect his chances of moving forward to the front benches are limited, but I praise him for making that point. It was great to hear Margaret McCulloch advocate more powers for the Scottish Parliament. Liberal Democrats are very much in favour of that and we have home rule plans. I hope that SNP members will embrace that agenda if they lose the referendum, as I hope that they will do. Mary Scanlon was right to praise many benefits of the budget, including the proud Liberal Democrat policy of a £10,000 tax threshold, which will take people on low and middle incomes out of tax altogether.

I am puzzled by that. During his speech, Mr Swinney used the word “surplus” numerous times. Is it a surplus or is it not a surplus?

Will the minister give way?

Will the minister give way now?

I respect the position of the minister and the Government on unilateral nuclear disarmament. However, is he able to tell me whether, if Scotland goes independent, there will be fewer nuclear weapons in the UK and the world?

With the agreement at Westminster, we do not want Scotland to be left behind on the matter of press regulation. What was greatly disappointing about the McCluskey report that was published on Friday was the fact that the expert group did not consider to any great extent the carrots and sticks—the incentives—that might be used in Scots law. The advisers recommended 10 possible incentives. As time is short, is the cabinet secretary considering a public consultation so that we can gather views from across Scotland about whether those carrots and sticks are appropriate for Scotland?

When the sirens whined, we dived to the floor, struggling with our flak jackets and helmets, yet the local politicians carried on as if nothing had happened, despite the risk. They had become accustomed to the sirens and the missiles. That was repeated over and over again during the three-day visit of the House of Commons Defence Committee to Basra, Umm Qasr and Baghdad. During that visit, 40 missiles fell within range. Even the green zone in Baghdad was not spared the infringements. We were due to meet the Iraqi president, but his house had been hit that very day. The missiles were a normal, daily occurrence. They were a matter of fact. That was in 2007—four years after Tony Blair and George Bush made that fateful decision to invade. A few weeks after I visited Iraq, I was at the funeral of Scott Kennedy. He was a young soldier who died in Iraq, blown up by a roadside bomb. His funeral was in Oakley, in my constituency. The community turned out en masse to show their support for the family. They recognised the difference between the armed forces and the Government. They recognised the talent and commitment of their soldiers, but disagreed with the war. A normal occurrence in Iraq, which happened every day of the week at the time, cost Scott Kennedy his life, and it cost the lives of hundreds of thousands of sons, daughters, mothers, fathers, friends and relatives. We felt it in Fife that Scott Kennedy had lost his life, but in Iraq many others whom we did not know also lost their lives. Just today, another 48 people have died and scores have been injured in bomb attacks in Baghdad. The war cost us £1 trillion but, a decade on, Iraq is still rocked with instability and division. The war was based on a false premise. It was illegal, costly, bloody and just plain wrong. [Applause.] Although I am proud that our party opposed the war, I am more ashamed that our country went to war in Iraq. It was a war that secured the support of the UK Parliament and this Parliament. I am ashamed that that happened, and of the intervention by the Labour Government, with the support of the Conservatives. I praise John Lamont for his contribution. I disagree with what he said, but I commend him for standing up and saying it because people need to hear why the case was made for the Iraq war. Back in 1999, Tony Blair laid out new criteria for what he believed was humanitarian intervention. Those principles were not wrong; he just did not stick to them. His failure to adhere to those principles damaged not just the principles but, as we have heard, lives. It is often said that countries, generals and leaders fight the last war rather than the next one. Decisions taken often reflect more the success or failure of previous conflicts rather than the special circumstances of the next. Iraq was affected by the success of Kosovo, Sierra Leone and, to a limited extent at the time, Afghanistan. However, failure in Iraq should not preclude future action elsewhere. It should not alter our collective responsibility to support freedom and protect human rights around the world. Doing nothing can be as bad as cavalier adventurism. No war is ever won; it is just that some are less bad than others. However, always sitting on our hands can be even worse. What tests, then, would we apply to future military action? If we are to have a serious debate, that is what we should focus on. I have four simple tests. The first is whether military action is legal under international law. Secondly, does it command local and regional support? That is also important. Thirdly, are we confident that it will alleviate suffering? Finally, and often most controversially, is the United Nations behind it, or, in the absence of that support, are there reasons to intervene on clear humanitarian grounds? Those are the questions that we need to apply to future conflicts. In Libya, I would say that the limited special forces action and air strikes relieved suffering. We secured the support of Arab countries surrounding Libya. We also secured a strong mandate from the UN and our action was judged legal. I would say that it passed the test. We also passed the test in Mali. Syria is the biggest test because the United Nations is clearly divided. With Russia standing firmly behind its ally, we have been limited to humanitarian aid. However, thousands of people are suffering and lots of people have died. Many more will die in future. The UK Government, along with many other European Union countries, has agreed to provide non-lethal equipment to the Opposition in Syria but has refused to rule out further support. It is a really difficult test. Do we stand aside when more people die in Syria? We need constantly to reapply the tests that I set out, which are whether we have regional support, whether action is legal and whether we have UN support. I supported the 1 million British people who marched against the war in 2003. They were not duped by Saddam Hussein and his deception and cruelty, but what they could not understand was why the containment and deterrence approach was to be abandoned; nor did they accept that military intervention was justified. They did not believe that Saddam Hussein was a good guy. They believed that the measures that were being taken were sufficient at the time and they were not convinced of the need for military action. They feared the wider consequences in the middle east, for Israel and Palestine, but also for the Iraqi people. They were anxious about Bush adventurism and revenge for the perceived failures of his father. They were concerned by the actions of a seemingly overcompliant UK Administration that was too eager to please George Bush. It is a shame that this Parliament and the Westminster Parliament did not listen to those people more carefully. For Scott Kennedy and the hundreds of thousands of others who have lost their lives, it is imperative that we study our history and learn our lessons. That could be their legacy. I move amendment S4M-05981.1, to insert after “UN resolution”: “; regrets the decision of the Labour government, with the support of the Conservatives, to press ahead with the invasion despite considerable opposition and many warnings about the danger of armed conflict; is of the view that the intervention was illegal under international law”.

Back to the Liberal party days—that would be wonderful. I woke up this morning to hear a radio report from a BBC reporter who had been in Iraq in the days immediately after the invasion. He was speaking to a man who had been sentenced by Saddam Hussein’s regime to a punishment for mistakenly writing on Saddam Hussein’s head on a currency note. The punishment was to be death by acid bath. That was Saddam Hussein. That was the brutal dictator who we were dealing with at the time. I therefore have a huge amount of sympathy for those who found it to be a difficult decision to make when they supported the Iraq war. I fully accept that Ann Clwyd, with her stories—and I have listened to Ann Clwyd on this in the House of Commons—makes a compelling case about the minorities who were punished in Iraq. I have heard the stories that John Lamont mentioned about the thousands of Kurds and Shias who were put to death under Saddam Hussein’s regime. I have heard the stories about the marsh Arabs, who suffered after they were left high and dry after the first Gulf war. They thought that they were going to get the full support of the allies against Saddam Hussein at that time, only to be left in the lurch. I understand all those stories, but the four tests that I mentioned earlier—that were absolutely required to be met in order to go ahead with the war—were not followed. Tony Blair made a compelling case; the simplistic argument—“If you knew what I knew”—is very compelling. He tried to tempt us into believing that he knew much more than he was able to tell us. It was quite an attractive argument and I can understand how so many were seduced by it. I do not condemn those who took the decision to support the war. I disagreed with them fundamentally. I was opposed to the war, my party was opposed to the war and I am glad that we were opposed to the war, because we did not believe that there was justification for the war. Kevin Stewart made an excellent speech, with his remarks about Allan Douglas and the turmoil that Allan Douglas’s family has gone through since. I have had to sit in the House of Commons when Gordon Brown—and Tony Blair before him—read out the weekly roll-call of the dead. It was a sobering experience. It brought it home that we had made a decision in the House of Commons to go to war and as a result, this roll-call was now being read out and 179 men and women died in Iraq. Allan Douglas was one of them—one of the brave. We need to remind ourselves of those personal stories. Joan McAlpine’s story about a victim on the other side, Ali Abbas, was equally compelling. He was one of hundreds of thousands who suffered as a result of what happened in Iraq. Those stories are important. We should not just think of such things in geostrategic and geopolitical terms. It is all about the individual—what does it do to the individual? Drew Smith made a good speech about veterans. Again, this is one of the lessons that we have to learn—about looking after the people who fought for the nation on our behalf. The problems around alcohol, prison and homelessness are well recognised. The Scottish Government and the UK Government have made good progress. The priority treatment for veterans is excellent. Headley Court down in the south-east of England is a fantastic facility. If members ever get a chance to go and see it, please go and see it. Veterans first point, at the other end of Princes Street, provides an excellent service, in particular for people who are suffering from mental health problems and also from combat stress, down in Ayr and elsewhere in the UK. It provides excellent facilities to deal with the problems that Drew Smith rightly highlighted. That is one of the lessons from Iraq—that we improve the support for those who have fought on our behalf. Iraq has been unstable since the start of the war. The shift in the balance of power between Iraq and Iran has been quite significant. Iran is quite a manipulative nation; it gets its tentacles all over that part of the world. When I was in Basra, I saw the effect of Iran’s influence in the south of Iraq. It was funding some of the terrorist groups in the south. It managed to kidnap some of our sailors in the Gulf. We should be wary whenever we intervene within a region; we have to be conscious of the balance of power between all the different stakeholders and countries, because if we unsettle that balance, there are unintended consequences. I disagree with Fiona McLeod.

Not just now. I recognise that Fiona McLeod is a pacifist. We have to weigh up the people who may suffer if we fail to act. That is the balance. The four tests are critical: making sure that we alleviate suffering; making sure that we have regional and local support; the United Nations has to be on board; and it has to be legal. Those are the four tests. If we comply with those four tests, we should not leave a nation and the people who are suffering within it high and dry. The final point that we need to remember is about those who spoke up. At the time, the momentum was in favour of war. I remember the pressure that we felt that we were under from all the compelling arguments that were being made. I am delighted that many MSPs, including Bruce Crawford, Jenny Marra and Fiona McLeod, attended the march, but I also give full praise to those who spoke up in the House of Commons—

Robin Cook, Ming Campbell, Charles Kennedy and Alex Salmond all deserve credit, because they stood up when it counted.

3. I join the First Minister in congratulating the new pope. In this turbulent world, Pope Francis has a heavy burden. I think that all members wish him well in his endeavours. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01244)

The First Minister will have heard that the Prime Minister is proposing to act on press regulation next week. The Prime Minister has ended the cross-party talks and will table amendments on Monday. He said this morning: “There’s no point in producing a system that the press won’t take part in.” Does the First Minister agree with the Prime Minister? Will he say how the Scottish Government intends to respond to the developments?

The First Minister is right; we will work constructively. I, too, am disappointed by the Prime Minister’s actions this morning. The First Minister’s expert group is currently considering how Scotland should implement Leveson. Is there any prospect of the First Minister being able to bring forward the group’s report, so that it can influence the decisions that might be made in Westminster next week?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I am sure that the cabinet secretary was going to say that crime in England and Wales is at its lowest level since records began. I am sure that that was going to be part of his next bit of script. However, since he is so admiring of the chief constable, will he agree to his call for fresh legislation?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does the justice secretary have anything to say about the police?

The Cabinet Secretary for Justice should take a moment to reflect on the comments towards the end of his speech in which he accused senior councillors holding the police to account of being on a junket with a chief constable. That kind of behaviour is unacceptable. Kenny MacAskill rose— I will not take an intervention, so the cabinet secretary can sit down. He should also reflect on his misrepresentation of the chief constable. On 20 December, in a letter to the Justice Committee, the chief constable said: “I am increasingly of the view that the only satisfactory resolution will be a change to legislation in order to address the matter fully.” Those were the chief constable’s words. If the cabinet secretary disagrees, he should clarify that now.

Was that after a meeting with the Lord Advocate and all his colleagues to ensure that the chief constable was brought into line? The Cabinet Secretary for Justice did not dispute the fact that the quotation is absolutely accurate. Kenny MacAskill adopts a kind of squirrel approach to politics that involves talking about anything at all anywhere else other than our responsibilities here. He did not include in his remarks any reference to the fact that, in England, crime is at its lowest since records began. We hear repeatedly about the level in Scotland, and good progress has been made, but we are not alone in that. He also needs to recognise that there are big divisions in his own ranks. There are divisions between civilian staff and police officers over their jobs. There are divisions at the Scottish Police College at Tulliallan, which were at the centre of the issues, and there are divisions with Unison. Margaret Mitchell is correct to call for a full business case, because we have not had a business case so far. When Christine Grahame talked about the Savile case, she was arguing for there to be no boundaries at all between organisations. Is she arguing for a United Kingdom-wide police force and saying that that is the only way we will ever be able to resolve the problems? We will have boundaries between organisations. The issue that we need to tackle is to do with communications between organisations and the use of technology. We need smooth communication if we are to deal with such issues.

We need to have smooth communications between all public bodies—between social work, education services and the police. The logic of Christine Grahame’s argument is that we should have one big public service organisation. There needs to be smooth communications between all services; otherwise, we end up with the idea that biggest is always best. Graeme Pearson is absolutely right when he talks about the Lord Advocate and patience running low. If things were so smooth and cordial, why was the Lord Advocate required to resolve the issue? Sandra White’s point about local councillors having direct access and influence over the police is a very interesting one. If local councillors were to disagree fundamentally with something that the police service’s chief constable had planned for their area or for a wider area, what power would they have? Do they have any ability to reject his plans? I suspect that they do not. Rod Campbell said that there were no debates about operational independence. He obviously was not listening. My colleague Alison McInnes tells me that there were endless debates about it. He was not listening, and neither was the justice secretary. There is a major issue here, which has shattered confidence in the police and among police officers. We have pitted the SPA against the chief constable and civilian staff against the police officers. Councillors have been stripped of real control over their police. Furthermore, cuts are being delivered, rather than the savings that were promised. The fear is that more is to come. Will we see the closure of local police stations and control rooms and the return—as the Labour Party has rightly identified—of the backroom bobbies? Will there be cuts to critical backroom staff, who are central to the efficient running of the service?

I will not, just now. What other areas will the SFA interfere with?

I mean the SPA. As one member of the board has asked, will the Scottish Police Authority want to investigate police operations? What creeping interference will there be from the SPA? We need fresh legislation.

I will not, just now. If we can get fresh legislation, we might be able to deal with the crisis within the police. By instinct, Liberal Democrats are distrustful of central power and control. That distrust is built on three solid beliefs: first, the inability of the man in the ministry fully to reflect the wide and varied needs of different communities; secondly, the faith and power of communities to do good; and thirdly, the fact that, when a crisis inevitably comes, power dispersed is safer power. The 2012 act does not just run counter to those beliefs—it is an insult to the communities that the Government is supposed to be serving. Those principles are why we were resolute in our opposition to centralisation of the police when others around us were attracted by the bright lights of shiny new uniforms. I have always believed that Parliament would regret passing the police centralisation bill—now the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012, but I thought that it might be for future generations to regret the actions of its founders. I did not believe that those actions would be regretted by this generation, and so quickly. The founders of the 2012 act—Kenny MacAskill and Roseanna Cunningham—will be remembered. We might say that never in the field of Scottish justice were so few resented so much by so many. It is not so much about fixing something that was not broken as about breaking something that was already fixed. Before the new force even exists, it will already have achieved some astounding feats: it will have turned civilian staff against police officers, turned the SPA against the police and turned the police’s back against local communities. I did not believe that it would be possible, but the Government has turned a crime fighting force into an infighting force. It has been a farce, not because the Scottish Government has lost control but because it grabbed control. Now, we must put the situation right—restoring what was right before the Government broke it. We need fresh legislation for the sake of security, for the sake of the justice system and for the sake of ministers’ red faces. The Government must act, and act now.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01226)

We have seen the papers and we know what the people on the front bench really think. In private, the First Minister is a pessimist. On oil, they are worried; on public service jobs, they are alarmed; and on pensions, they are panicking. Of those three challenges, which his finance secretary identified, which keeps the First Minister awake at night?

The finance secretary claps, but the First Minister contradicts the finance secretary’s figures. Here he goes again: excuses are at an all-time high, panic is rising and flannel is at unprecedented levels, as we have just heard. The SNP has boasted that Scotland’s deficit is £7.6 billion. Who on earth celebrates—[Interruption.]

Who on earth celebrates when they spend more than they get? [Interruption.]

No Scottish family would celebrate that, and yet the SNP does. Now we know that the celebrations are fake. There is no fizz in the First Minister’s juice any more. Is it not the case that only his cabinet colleagues get to know the truth about the real price of independence? Why does he think that the real truth is only good enough for the privileged few?

For a moment, I thought that Maureen Watt had been converted to the case for the United Kingdom. Should Mr Swinney not just recognise that, under his proposals for the currency, Scotland would have less influence, not more?

I thank the minister for the advance copy of his statement. He said that he is more than capable of making decisions on defence for Scotland, but he omitted to make substantial reference to the Royal Navy and its new submarines on the Clyde. The new HMS Ambush officially joined the fleet on Monday. Does the minister or does he not welcome the decision to base all the UK’s conventionally-armed submarines on the Clyde?

Several members have mentioned telecare and other new technology that allows elderly people to stay in their own homes. I had been quite attracted to that new technology—until 5 o’clock this morning, when I was woken by the battery dying on my carbon monoxide detector. The second time I woke up, I listened to a radio discussion of an issue that is relevant to the debate: that the UK is lagging behind other countries in both life expectancy and healthy life expectancy. There has been much mention of the shocking disparity in healthy life expectancy between Scotland’s poorest and wealthiest areas, ranging from 56 years in the east end of Glasgow to 70 just up the road in East Dunbartonshire. However, although we acknowledge such differences, we should not forget that we are probably lagging behind other countries—most significantly, Japan—that are making overall progress on health. The difference in healthy life expectancy between East Dunbartonshire and Japan is 10 years, so we should not take for granted or be complacent about the progress that we still need to make. This is not just about health inequalities, but about our overall health. After all, we celebrate the health improvements that we have made but the fact is that there is still an awful lot more work to do. Early signs are emerging that we are not really prepared for this change in the demographic. My colleague Jim Hume has raised many times the issue of emergency hospital admissions, which he found to be at a 10-year high for elderly people. That significant number suggests that we are not prepared for what we knew to be coming. Like Malcolm Chisholm, I accept that previous Governments have not done enough in this regard and just hope that we can get things right now. Lord Sutherland was right to point out that although £4.5 billion is spent on social care for the elderly, £1.5 billion of that goes on emergency admissions. We need to make better use of that £1.5 billion to prevent such admissions and give elderly people the better quality of life that they deserve. I do not minimise the challenge that faces the Scottish Government and I acknowledge the financial pressures that it is under, especially with the—I believe, necessary—reductions in its finance. That said, even if we were to have maintained the increases in finances that the Labour Government delivered over a number of years, we would still have a significant gap between demand and the money that would be available to meet it. We are going to have to change how the country works, which is why I acknowledge in many ways John Swinney’s comment about the need to find new ways of delivering services. Carrying on with the current model is neither financially sustainable nor sustainable in personnel, and we need a radical change. We talk a lot about planning for the future, but the fact is that our consideration of these matters has a very short lifespan or takes place in a very short timescale. Many councils still work to three-year cycles; it is good that the City of Edinburgh Council has taken a 10-year view, but we all need to be looking way beyond that to ensure that we future-proof the available services. John Swinney made a very good point about the need to shift from the old model of delivering services to the new one. It is tough to do those things, because when outdated services are shut down to create space for new services, people object. That is where the challenge is, and that is why it is important that Parliaments such as this come together when we recognise that the old delivery models are unsustainable and that we need to move towards a new model. People get attracted to buildings and old-style services, so we need to explain that we need, in order to be sustainable and maintain standards, to deliver new service models. One of those models is to keep people at home. The case manager model has been delivered, although I am not sure how widespread it is now. Case managers would be closely involved in ensuring that people could stay in their own homes, by integrating services for that individual and pooling social services, healthcare and transport. Service models such as that are required to move towards sustainable service. That is the immediate issue for preventative spend. A lot of this is about prevention. How do we deal with the immediate crisis and avoid that £1.5 billion cost of emergency admissions to hospital? We also need to consider medium-term measures, which I would class as things such as public health initiatives on smoking, diet and minimum pricing on alcohol, which we supported. It is important that the smoking strategy comes out with meaningful targets and measures, and that we do not set targets that will not be delivered because action is not taken. Dr Harry Burns is interesting in that regard. He said that it is important to do that work on smoking, diet and alcohol minimum pricing. However, that is only medium-term work. We need to do much more over the longer term to change people’s life chances. Harry Burns is very aware that we need to move towards enriching early life, because that gives the best hope of intervening in the irrational cycle of disadvantage that can continue over a long period. We think that we need things such as nursery education for three-year-olds, which many members will have heard me talk about before, to try to break the cycle of disadvantage. If we can give people the tools to look after themselves and earn, we can look towards ensuring that they do not fall into the disadvantage that many others fall into. Therefore, our immediate crisis measures and the medium-term measures that we take on smoking and alcohol minimum pricing will not be required, because we will have managed to change the way that people progress through their lives. The Carnegie UK Trust has done some very good work on proposing changes to the way that public services work so that we do not just provide services to people—so that we do not do things to people, but do things with people to enable them to do things for themselves, rather than always be provided with a service. I think that we should be moving towards the enabling state. That is not the style in which public services currently operate; we tend to think of commissioning a service for somebody that needs something, rather than working with them to deliver a new kind of service. It is important that Nesta’s work is respected and supported, because it is looking at trying to improve community capacity—the ability of a family in a community to look after itself, rather than always to rely on the state to provide support.

It is important that we look for sustainable models of support, because, as John Swinney has repeatedly said, the current models of service are not sustainable. We will work constructively with the Government to deliver those new models of service, no matter how difficult that is.

It is a pleasure to take part in the debate. Like Kevin Stewart, I quite enjoy getting into the guts of public service reform and how the systems work. Often in politics we deal with the top level and do not consider in detail how things work in practice, so I share his enthusiasm—my wife does not, but I certainly do. Sarah Boyack made a very pertinent point at the beginning of the debate about the huge demographic and financial pressures that we face, all at the same time. Even if the spending levels that her party secured in its time in government were to be maintained, there would still be a massive gap between demand and the available finance. I know that many members in the chamber oppose the cuts at Westminster, but even if those cuts had not happened, there would still be an enormous challenge to overcome. If we want to maintain the standards of services to which we have become accustomed, we are going to have to change the way that we supply those services. That is why the Carnegie Trust’s report “The Enabling State” was welcome. It looked at a different way for the state to conduct itself, by not always looking just to provide services but enabling others to provide services too, so that we can build community capacity for the future and maintain high standards. One of the biggest critics of the current Government’s approach—and of previous Governments’ approaches, too—is Vanguard Consulting. John Seddon—quite a controversial character whom I am sure many members have met—is very critical of the top-down approach of guidance, command and control, targets and the auditing regime, which stifles local innovation. I would like the committee to look at some of the work that Vanguard has done, because I would like to see it tested with some of the practitioners on the ground. I have seen some of the evidence from Vanguard’s videos and from the people who have followed its advice. There is quite compelling evidence on removing barriers between the back office and the front office; making sure that we have experts, no matter where the public come into contact with them; and driving out inefficiencies not on the basis of unit cost or a belief that only scale provides efficiency but by ensuring that the structure of the service is based on the user’s needs. I have been quite attracted to some of Vanguard’s work, so I would like the committee to look at it. If members can put up with John Seddon’s criticisms, it is worth listening to what he has to say. I am concerned about how far we are going to go with shared services. I accept that we need to deal with bed blocking and the integration of social care services and health services. However, how far do we go with dealing with the problems at the interface? Bed blocking is the issue just now, but if we get problems in community transport or housing in the future, will the answer be simply to enlarge the organisation to include them? We need to be careful about how much we believe that straightforward structural reorganisation to create bigger structures will necessarily deal with the problems. At some point, somebody from outside the organisation will have to interface with it.

With police and fire service reform, we have seen the belief that bigger organisations are somehow the way to get efficiency. To a certain extent, college regionalisation is part of that. Scale is not necessarily the answer. I think that Stewart Stevenson is making the point that we do not necessarily have to create bigger organisations in order to secure efficiency. Simply focusing on unit cost, rather than the whole service, does not necessarily deliver the efficiencies and the improvements to service that we are trying to achieve. I return to the central point that I made at the beginning of my speech. If community planning partnerships are the way to make sure that parts of the public sector or the voluntary sector exchange information, there have to be proper and equal partnerships between all the organisations involved. Voluntary organisations need to play a full part in CPPs. There will be good evidence of that in some parts of the country. Sometimes we have an obsession with how organisations should be structured, but a lot of this comes down to good local management and leadership. We should cherish and encourage such leadership, spread best practice and foster that approach to make sure that we value the quality of the training and the personnel involved in the delivery of services. My plea is that we should look again at what Vanguard Consulting says and look again to ensure that we are not adopting a top-down, heavy approach and that we have a bottom-up, engaging approach that uses the talents of front-line staff. In that way, we can achieve efficiencies in services.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what assessment it has made of the impact that college mergers will have on access to courses in Fife. (S4O-01823)

That does not seem to be a commitment that there will be no reduction in access to courses in Fife. I will continue to press the cabinet secretary on the issue, which is important in the context of the proposed change. I want the cabinet secretary to go further and to consider whether people should be able to access courses throughout Fife and not just in the traditional places in the region. Will he consider supporting a college base in St Andrews, which up to now has not had the further education support that it needs?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01187)

I am astonished that the First Minister seems satisfied with the waiting times figure of 23 per cent. Has he any regrets about what he told us when he put out a press release on 27 May 2008 bragging that the Scottish Government had got rid of “the smoke and mirrors”? Has he got any regrets?

The First Minister talks about political to-ing and fro-ing. His Government issued 50 press releases bragging about his waiting times initiative. Fifty press releases! He told us how good the system was at the same time as thousands of people were being sent to the waiting times equivalent of Siberia. Has he got anything humble at all to say to those people?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I am intrigued by the cabinet secretary’s UK Government angle. Is she saying that the UK Government forced the Scottish Government to mishandle the NPD programme?

I once had fears, when I entered this Parliament, that the SNP masses on the back benches would never hold their ministers to account. After that contribution, my fears can be laid to rest. There is no doubt that Richard Lyle put John Swinney and Nicola Sturgeon right up on the rack. They are now scrutinised; they now fear their back benchers, who are doing the job that I feared they would never do. I commend Richard Lyle for his contribution. However, I feel a little bit sorry for Nicola Sturgeon these days.

I know; I never thought that members would hear that from me. Her particular job was handed on by Alex Neil, who I do not see in the chamber this afternoon—at least John Swinney has the ability and nerve to turn up and answer for the decisions that he has made. I have a bit of advice for Nicola Sturgeon, because there seems to be a bit of a trend. If the boys offer her a new job in the near future, I would think twice before accepting it. The independence campaign is another indication perhaps of a job that I am sure that Nicola Sturgeon would rather not have accepted. I am sure that the Government would accept that, in the past, it has said that it could be tremendously proud of being on time and on budget. I do not think we will hear that any more, even from Richard Lyle. Only the SNP could claim success out of failure by saying that it now takes pride in simply reprofiling a programme on time. This Government is an expert on every other Government, but never on itself. That is certainly an indication—it may not be the first—that this Government is too focused on its obsession with independence to focus on the issues that really matter, which are about creating jobs and opportunities.

Not just now. All the issues in this afternoon’s debate are devolved, but all we hear about from the ministers is what is happening somewhere else: “Let’s blame somewhere else.” Well, the UK Government never forced the Scottish Government to make a cock-up of its NPD programme.

No, not just now. John Swinney has lectured us in previous debates for being ignorant and not recognising that capital project programmes are very difficult to deliver. He said: “Anybody who tries to suggest anything different is not confronting the reality of some of the circumstances”.—[Official Report, 20 December 2012; c 15071.] I presume that he recognised that reality back in 2010, when he boasted about the massive programme, about which Alex Neil had previously said: “These projects will energise our economy and deliver a legacy of infrastructure assets.” I presume that the SNP knew that at the time. I presume that it had confronted reality back in 2010. However, suddenly now anyone who suggests that it has not managed the programme properly is not confronting reality. The SNP needs to confront reality and admit its mistakes. To say that it has been transparent is very far from reality.

What we face here is a promise that the SNP would deliver £353 million. It has delivered £20 million. As Gavin Brown rightly said, the SNP said that £100 million would deliver 1,400 jobs. We have £20 million out of £353 million, so I estimate that the SNP has failed to deliver 4,500 jobs—that is the impact of the SNP’s mishandling. The SNP should reflect on its own abilities rather than criticise anyone.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01166)

Yesterday, in the budget debate, I was told that the Government had rejected my realistic and costed proposals to give 24,000 two-year-olds a free nursery place. I was told that the First Minister’s Government preferred family nurse partnerships instead. Will he tell me how many children currently benefit from family nurse partnerships?

I suspect that even the most sycophantic back bencher will have recognised that my question was about family nurse partnerships, not three and four-year-olds. The First Minister should check his facts: in England, the Government is increasing the standard for nursery education, not reducing it. The First Minister is right that the number of children benefiting from family nurse partnerships is low. It is only 908. Family nurse partnerships are a good thing, but they are no substitute for 24,000 nursery places. The authorities are providing both in England—not one or the other. I should not have to remind the First Minister that all the experts say that investment before the age of three is the best investment to make as it gives the best return. If the First Minister is not going to use his budget to make the change, how will he close the gap between the 900 people who he wants to help and the 24,000 people who could benefit under my plans?

The cabinet secretary gave a rather complicated explanation; the reality is that Aberdeen City Council is getting 79 per cent of the average, which is £20 million short of what it was promised. It was promised 85 per cent and it is getting only 79 per cent. Of course the budget has changed, but the reality is that Aberdeen has been short changed.

It is worth taking a moment to consider today’s order, which is quite significant. It is probably the most significant local government finance order for many years because, following the SNP’s decision to centralise the police—which we opposed—local government has seen £1.2 billion stripped from its control. The Government claims that it is in favour of local government and has a respect and trust agenda with local government, but I think that stripping £1.2 billion from its control shows a certain degree of disrespect. It is worth reflecting on the fact that this is probably one of the most significant orders for some time, which probably represents one of the biggest-ever transfers of fiscal power from local government to central Government since around the time of the poll tax.

Stewart Stevenson is right—removing the ring fencing was a good move and gave a certain degree of control to local government. However, the order that we are discussing has undermined all those efforts. The stripping of that finance from local government control has significantly reduced its powers. It is also worth reflecting on the fact that the promise of the 85 per cent funding floor has been broken. Mr Swinney promised that the funding floor would be 85 per cent. He gives a long explanation of his thinking, which, I am sure, convinces some people. However, I wonder what the current view is of the SNP MSP who said, at the time, that the funding floor represented a great victory and that, with regard to Aberdeen, “the new funding floor will give the city a fairer deal for years to come.” They said “years”, plural. Not one year, but years. We need an SNP Government that follows through on that commitment. On a Scotland-wide average, spending per person is about £1,795, based on the Scottish Government’s allocation of more than £9 billion to local councils. In Aberdeen, with a budget of about £311 million and a population of around 220,000, the figure is £1,412. That accounts for £20 million—that is how much Aberdeen has been short changed. I hope that all the Aberdeen members in the chamber are able to explain to their constituents why that funding has not been followed through and why the funding floor has not been kept. That will have a significant impact over the years to come. When John Swinney winds up the debate, I hope that he will at least reflect on the fact that the commitment has not been maintained, and I hope that it will be maintained in future settlements. Such commitments are important. In the few seconds that I have left, I will reflect on what I think should be the direction of travel in Scottish politics in years to come. Many parties in the Parliament are in favour of more powers for this Parliament, some more than others. I do not think that it should necessarily stop at Holyrood. We also need to consider the transfer of powers to local government. That is why, in our proposals for home rule in a federal UK, we have set out that council tax and business rate powers should be much more in the hands of local government, so that it, too, can have control over the purse strings. Holding the purse strings brings fiscal responsibility in the same way that holding the purse strings in this place, in partnership with the UK, is what we should be trying to achieve. I hope that that is what members of the Parliament will agree to in the years to come.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

The additional investment in housing is a welcome development. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth referred to childcare and nursery education. I was giving him time in his speech to explore the possibility of additional funding for that area, particularly for two-year-olds. Is he minded to invest more in that area?

I get amused by speeches that condemn the Westminster Government for being mean and cutting funds to the Scottish Government but then celebrate the levels of investment in the NHS. It is the Westminster Government, not the SNP, that is making the decisions about the NHS. [Interruption.]

To sound a note of consensus, however, I have to say that I have found this budget process to be open and inclusive. John Swinney and I can work together and discuss priorities for Scotland, and I hope that he shares my ambition of building a strong economy in a fairer society to give people the chance to get on. Indeed, that is why in the budget process we picked two realistic priorities. First, on colleges, we made quite a bit of progress last year, reversing the £40 billion—I mean £40 million; it feels like £40 billion—cut to their budget. This year, our ambition was to restore the £35 million cut, which would have had a significant effect on colleges that are going through a period of reform. It is difficult to expect our colleges to reform during a period of contraction, especially when we are trying to train not just young people but people of all ages in the skills they will need to fill the jobs that we are working hard to create. I was therefore astonished to hear celebrations from the SNP benches when the £25 million cut to the colleges’ budget was announced. It is nothing to celebrate. Given the £35 million cut that had been planned, £10 million is nothing. I was really disappointed in the announcement.

Not just now. Our second priority was nursery education. Mr Swinney has heard me say repeatedly that we want two-year-olds—ideally, 40 per cent of them—to get 15 hours a week of nursery education. In England, 40 per cent of two-year-olds will get that, starting in September. Many people, including Professor James Heckman, have cited that as a great investment, because investment before the age of three has the best educational returns. However, in Scotland, only 1 per cent of two-year-olds will get that, and today’s budget has not changed the situation one inch. Under our proposal, 24,000 of the poorest two-year-olds in Scotland would have received 15 hours of nursery education a week. We recognise that money is tight and that finances are difficult, but we identified where the money would come from to invest in those areas. That is why I am really disappointed that John Swinney has not taken up our offer. He cites the family nurse partnerships, but those are not unique to Scotland—they are happening in England as well. However, what is unique to Scotland is that only 1 per cent of two-year-olds will get the nursery education that 40 per cent of two-year-olds in England will get. Scotland is being left far behind. James Heckman will be disappointed by the SNP Government’s decision today.

I am not sure where the member got that fact from. If she checks the announcement of the measure in England, she will find that it is about increasing, not decreasing, the standard of nursery education. She should go back and check her facts, because 1 per cent in Scotland is not an improvement on 40 per cent in England. It is a real disappointment that the SNP has not stepped up to the plate. The experts have clearly said that that is a good investment. Many SNP back benchers, along with members of all parties, signed a motion on the issue. Many of those SNP members are here today, but they applauded the budget. We should aim for 40 per cent, but we are getting 1 per cent. The budget is letting down 24,000 two-year-olds. James Heckman will be disappointed; John Swinney should be disappointed; and I am certainly disappointed. I thought that we could work with John Swinney and come up with an agreement. Last year, we worked together and came up with an agreement.

Not just now—I am in my final minute. We worked together last year and we got more money for colleges. I hoped that we could work together again this year, at least for two-year-olds, because they deserve that kind of investment. Our plan was not unrealistic: it set out the investment, which was to be phased up to 2016. We had a plan. John Swinney has time to reverse his decision. He can work to make a commitment for two-year-olds. If he seriously believes that we need to change a generation and improve the life chances of those young people, he should turn back now.

Mr Chisholm is spot on about the NUS, because Robin Parker has just said that the NUS cannot accept a cut of £24.6 million to colleges, on top of the huge cuts that have been made over the past few years.

I do not want to interrupt Jamie Hepburn’s self-congratulatory list, but will he express any concern about the NUS’s comment this afternoon that it cannot accept the £24.6 million cut?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. It is good to have you back. Members will have heard this morning that the Scottish Government has published a document that purports to be the plan for the transition to independence. The Government has released it to the press and sent it to other Governments without having the courtesy to take any of the available parliamentary routes. This Parliament might have wanted to see the document before it was signed, sealed and sent. We might have wanted to correct the factual inaccuracies about Lincoln, press for a bit more than three paragraphs on transition and challenge the proposal that the Scottish National Party appoint itself to the new top posts of Scottish foreign and defence secretaries, even before an election. There are fewer than 300 words to explain the complex task of unravelling a 300-year-old union, negotiating 14,000 international treaties and establishing a new defence force and security services. We are promised yet more of this in the months ahead. Are we really expected simply to sit by our radios every morning to wait for the latest announcement? The document fuels the suspicion that the SNP has not done its homework. Twenty pages of planning is not adequate. Presiding Officer, under standing order 7.3, will you support a demand that Parliament has sight of such documents in the coming months so that we can scrutinise them and insist that the Scottish Government does its homework? If we do not demand a change of attitude now, we will have to continue to endure this shabby treatment.

Have you received any indication from the Government as to whether it wishes to make a statement?

In her revised plan, has the cabinet secretary accelerated plans for road and rail transport routes to the north and north-east from the central belt, including the A9?

We know what the SNP does not like: it takes every opportunity to focus on the Westminster Government’s ills. It takes up copious amounts of parliamentary time focusing not on the SNP Government’s responsibilities, but on another Government’s responsibilities and duties. From an almost lofty position, it likes to complain and commentate, but it rarely provides solutions. Everybody would admit that that is a tough task, and the purpose of our amendment is to allow SNP members to set out what they would like the Scottish welfare state to look like. They can tell us which benefits will be cut, which will be increased and which will remain unchanged. They can also tell us whether they would add £2.5 billion to the budget that an independent Scotland would inherit.

Not just now. From ministers’ rhetoric—I have numerous quotes here—I assume that the full £2.5 billion will be restored immediately. The debate is timely, given that the SNP’s welfare commission was launched earlier this month and, apparently, will report in the next couple of months. I am sure that commission members would welcome contributions from those on the SNP benches on whether benefits will be cut, which benefits will be prioritised and which will be deprioritised. I am sure that they would welcome SNP members’ deliberations, which could feed into their conclusions. Benefit recipients will also want to hear from the SNP about what its priorities will be for an independent Scotland’s welfare budget. They will want to know that the SNP’s actions will match the rhetoric. SNP members—ministers likewise—have said on numerous occasions that they want reform and simplification of the welfare system, but I have not heard from them one single example of a reform. Perhaps ministers today—

Not just now. I am sure that members will take the opportunity today to tell us. I am also sure that the SNP’s fiscal commission, too, would welcome SNP members’ comments on how they plan to restore £2.5 billion to the welfare budget. The commission has been tasked with bringing a degree of fiscal credibility to the SNP’s plans for independence. That credibility will be very important as it will impact directly on credit ratings, the cost of borrowing and the sustainability of an independent Scotland’s finances.

Not just now. I am curious about whether the fiscal commission will meet the welfare commission to ensure a degree of consistency across the numerous commissions that the SNP is setting up. After all, we will want coherence, which previous commissions have lacked, with a commission saying one thing and ministers saying something completely different. That might change this afternoon, but I am not sure whether the Deputy First Minister’s speech indicates that it will. I do not think that the SNP is going to tell us which benefits will be prioritised or deprioritised. Who will be the winners and losers? We did not hear a single word about that from the Deputy First Minister. I think that, this afternoon, SNP members will seek to prejudge the outcome of the welfare commission’s work and will, as they have done with many other advisers that they have recruited, ignore its conclusions. They have already made up their minds what they do not like—and they do not like to face up to the reality of having to live within their finances. There will be a lack of consistency between fiscal responsibility and their welfare commission. We need costed plans, not uncosted rhetoric. To be fair, we Liberal Democrats favour a strong economy and a fair society that gives everyone a chance to get on. That is why we have cut taxes for those on low or middle incomes, increased the state pension and introduced a £1 billion youth contract while at the same time—this is critical—restoring the public finances to create the conditions for growth. We must make it absolutely clear that under Labour the welfare state increased by 40 per cent at a time of considerable economic growth. In the 10 years before 2010, the costs increased from £132 billion to £192 billion. That is simply not sustainable.

I am in my last minute. We reject the rhetoric of the skivers and the strivers—I say to Drew Smith that we have never embraced and do not favour that terminology. We want an enabling society that allows people to get up and get on. SNP members should take the opportunity this afternoon not just to criticise the UK Government but to set out their plans in detail. If they do not match their actions to their rhetoric, I do not think that they deserve to be trusted. I move amendment S4M-05521.2, to leave out from “with concern” to end and insert: “the position on child benefit in the UK; further notes that the Scottish Government has established a working group to advise it on what welfare policies it would be able to afford in the event of independence; believes that it would be sensible for people in Scotland to wait for the conclusion of that review before accepting any assurances from Scottish ministers on this matter; notes that statements have been made by Scottish Government ministers and supporters implying that a full £2.5 billion will be added to the welfare and benefits bill of Scotland after independence; notes that this figure does not include any costing for additional welfare benefits to be recommended for groups such as carers; awaits with interest the details on how such a bill and the additions will be accommodated within the estimated resources of an independent Scotland; in particular, waits to see if an immediate priority will be set out to restore child benefit to those earning over £60,000 in an independent Scotland; believes that, if the full figure of £2.5 billion is not part of costed plans, that would imply that some welfare changes are not proposed for reversal and believes that those should be clearly set out by the expert group, and further notes that the UK Government will have cut the tax bill for a family of two people on modest incomes by around £5,000 over the period.”

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

I see that Mark McDonald’s affection for the Liberal Democrats has not improved.

Maybe that taught him a lesson. Mark McDonald fails to recognise that we need to look at all the changes over a period of time. If we look at one budget in isolation, we do not recognise, for instance, the significant cuts to tax for people on low and middle incomes. We have to look at everything in the round, not in isolation. I am sure that we can all pick isolated statistics to prove our case, but Mark McDonald needs to look at the matter in a much more considered way. I know more at the end of the debate about what the SNP does not like. I thought that that was what we would get. I did not think that we would get many answers about what kind of reform the SNP would like. The SNP has previously promised—on numerous occasions—further reform. It has said that it wants simplification and that it does not think that the welfare state should stay the same. However, nothing—not one single thing, not one idea—came forward from any SNP members who spoke today. Jayne Baxter made the worthy point that the independence debate should not force an absence of policy. She is absolutely right about that, but independence is the excuse; whenever anybody from the SNP is challenged about the detail, they say that that is a future Scotland’s choice. They fail to recognise that they need to spell out what it would look like. They cannot criticise and then fail to come up with the answers. Clare Adamson had some fine words—actually, it was quite a good speech—but there was no substance at all on policy. There were no ideas. I can only assume from all the remarks that the SNP is in favour of increasing the welfare budget by £2.5 billion when Scotland is independent, because not one single SNP member came up with any ideas about reform. Actually, I apologise. Annabelle Ewing came up with a suggestion on Trident.

I do not know how many times the Trident money has been spent. I am sorry to disappoint Annabelle Ewing, but Angus Robertson has already grabbed that money for defence.

No. The Trident money has been spent numerous times, and apparently will also be spent on the welfare state. I look forward to a little bit of consistency. The Scottish Government’s welfare working group will have received a clear message today, which was “Do not change one single thing. There should be no reform to the welfare state in an independent Scotland.” At least it gets a clear message from the SNP, which is that the budget needs to be restored by £2.5 billion because the SNP has no suggestions. The Scottish Government’s fiscal commission working group has also received a clear message, which was “Forget about fiscal responsibility and the fact that the welfare budget increased by 40 per cent during Labour’s time in government, because we should not change a single thing.” That approach fundamentally undermines the SNP’s case for independence. It cannot both claim to be fiscally responsible and, at the same time, not deal with the welfare state. It needs to be dealt with because it is not sustainable and it is not possible to carry on as we are. The SNP’s continuing claim that no reform is required lacks credibility. I recognise that the child benefit changes are not ideal. It is a bit of a crude way of changing the system, but it avoids an expensive means-testing process. I do not think that we can really argue that the top priority should be to protect the highest earners in the country—the wealthiest 15 per cent. I think that it is reasonable to target that group if we are reforming other parts of the welfare state. Although it is not ideal and I would prefer not to do it, I believe that needs must as we reform the welfare state. Having listened to the speeches from the SNP benches, and some from the Labour benches, one might think that all reform is bad and that nothing should ever change. To me, some of the changes to the welfare state are pretty good. We all have our own examples of people who we meet in our constituencies and who tell us their story about the welfare system and the changes. Not so long ago, I met a family who told me that they would like to work but it would not pay and it would be difficult to go out to work. They have their family interests at heart—I commend them for that—but they have decided to stay on benefits because it is too difficult and they would not earn enough to work. The welfare state traps on benefits people who would like to go to work. We have a situation in which someone has to wait five weeks before they get their benefits back if they do not keep the job that they have sought. That happens on many occasions. People fear losing the job that they are going for, so it is not financially worth it to go for it. That is why we have made changes to make work pay, to cut tax on low and middle incomes, and to cap the welfare benefits. In itself, that reform will encourage people into work—and we must all agree in this chamber that work is good for families. We need to encourage people to go to work: it is a good thing. We seem to hear from some people that work is a bad thing that we do not want to encourage or incentivise, but I believe that we need to create a welfare state that encourages. Let me gently respond to Christina McKelvie. She said that we are attacking women, but she needs to look at just two things. First, the improvements to maternity entitlements have made a significant change to women in work. Secondly, she should consider nursery education for two-year-olds. In England, 40 per cent of the poorest children will get 15 hours a week of nursery education, while in Scotland the rate is only 1 per cent.

To me, that is an example of the coalition committing to making a difference for women and making a difference for society.

Does that mean that Margaret Burgess will immediately restore the £2.5 billion to the welfare budget?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01141)

The First Minister has been an advocate of the Scottish Parliament for all his political life. I understand why he might not want to give up his ambition of an independent Scotland but, if Scotland votes no, would he engage with other parties on further powers for the Parliament? [Interruption.]

Nicola Sturgeon has urged us all to work together if Scotland votes yes. Will the First Minister work with us if Scotland votes no?

The First Minister knows that the referendum is about whether Scotland stays part of the United Kingdom. Even his own consultation rejected a second question. I do not quite understand why he is so shy about this. The Liberal Democrats have published our plans for home rule in a federal UK. Reform Scotland has produced devo plus and the Institute for Public Policy Research’s devo more will be out tomorrow. A consensus on more powers is emerging from all those plans and it seems to be endorsed by members of the public. Will the First Minister at least consider working with me and others on a new constitutional future if Scotland votes no? His deputy wants partnership. That is reasonable. Why does not he?

The finance secretary told the Finance Committee that his mid-year estimate for business rates income is about £90 million higher than he had budgeted for. Can he give Parliament an update on the figure?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Mr Findlay accept any responsibility for what has happened since Labour left power?

The member said that the coalition is assaulting the low paid. Can he explain why the coalition is increasing the tax threshold to £10,000?

I actually welcome Chic Brodie’s speech, because he made the case for many of the reforms that the coalition Government is implementing. What was it that he said—that a Government that does not seek and manage efficiencies will die? He then said that we should not build an economy on debt, but it is his party that is proposing to increase borrowing, driving up the costs of borrowing, costing us more, driving up interest rates, increasing our mortgage costs—

No, not just now. Chic Brodie’s speech was a direct contradiction—an assault on the poor, when, in partnership, the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives are increasing the tax thresholds for the poor in a way—

No. We are increasing the tax thresholds for the poor in a way that the Labour Party never did in all its time in power. Mr Brodie should read his speech back, because he will find that he has converted to our cause and, once again, may wish to join the Liberal Democrats. We had a good discussion last week about Mr Swinney’s budget. I welcomed the opportunity to put forward our proposals for change. Mr Swinney is a man who is keen on balanced budgets and good housekeeping. He may support Chic Brodie in his efforts to keep efficiencies and to seek and manage change. Perhaps they are in the same boat. We welcome that discussion because it is important that we try to work constructively. We worked constructively last year and we will seek to do so again in order to seek an agreement. We have highlighted two areas. The first is college funding. We are backing the National Union of Students Scotland campaign, as we did last year. We think that the proposal to put an extra £35 million back into the budget to reverse the cuts is worthy of consideration. We support that proposal, especially when colleges are playing an essential role in trying to train and upskill people so that they are ready for the jobs that will come when the economy recovers. It is important that Mr Swinney reflects on that. If he does—

Not just now. He has a cheek—he did not accept one intervention.

No, not just now. We will support the budget if, for example, we can secure the extra funding for colleges, because they play an important role in ensuring that we have a workforce that is ready to boost the economy. We would also link to the economy support for extra investment in nursery education. We would support such extra investment to give 40 per cent of the poorest two-year-olds in Scotland 15 hours of nursery education each week. The Nobel laureate James Heckman, whom I have mentioned on numerous occasions, says that the highest return on investment in education is on investment in education before the age of three. That is when the biggest impact can be made. If we make the right investment at that time in a person’s life, we can determine what the outcome for them will be at the age of 26. So far, the Scottish Government has committed to free childcare and education for 1 per cent of two-year-olds. We think that that is good, but that the figure needs to be increased to 40 per cent. We recognise that that cannot be done in one fell swoop and that such a move has to be phased in over a period of time. In England, the UK Government is looking to extend such provision to 20 per cent of two-year-olds by September this year, and to increase that figure to 40 per cent at a later stage. We hope that Mr Swinney will accept that request from us and back our plan for his budget. We think that our proposals are modest and worthy of consideration. We will not come up with a long list of proposals without giving any indication of how they could be paid for, which is an approach that Mr Findlay seemed to be attracted to. We will come forward with sensible proposals that we think that the Scottish Government can afford.

Not just now. The Government has a budget of £32 billion. In a budget of such a size, we reckon that it is certainly possible to find the amount of money that we are asking for. In response to an intervention from me, Mr Swinney highlighted the additional resources that might be available from business rates in this financial year. We reckon that the money is available for investment in the important areas of colleges and early intervention. We welcome the £50 million of additional funding for social housing—we think that that is a good investment, as there is a desperate need for additional social housing in Scotland. I return to an issue that I have raised previously with Mr Swinney—that of the local government floor. A guarantee was made to Aberdeen City Council that it would receive 85 per cent of the average figure for council funding in Scotland. However, there has been a drop to 79 per cent. Mr Swinney has tried to explain why that calculation can be made only at the start of the spending process, but I find that explanation difficult to understand. The guarantee was given that no council would receive less than 85 per cent of the average figure, but next year Aberdeen City Council will receive only 79 per cent of that amount. As 79 per cent is less than 85 per cent, its funding has gone through the floor. I hope that Mr Swinney will reflect on that. The proposal that the guarantee be met—which is a commitment that he and many others have made in election campaigns and beyond—is a sensible one. I have set out reasonable suggestions on college funding and nursery education. We will work constructively with the Government to achieve those ends. If the Government delivers what we wish, we will vote with it; we are not afraid to do that. If the Government’s budget is good enough, we will be with it.

Does Mr Gibson give any credit to the UK Government for contributing to the situation that he describes?

I hear what Mark McDonald says about welfare reform, but what would he do instead? What changes would he make? Has he any idea of the kind of welfare system he would have?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01118)

Tomorrow, the new Scottish Police Authority is set to strip the chief constable of significant powers and impose three new powerful group directors over whom the chief constable will have no control. Last time, the First Minister laughed that off as “creative tension”. Since then, the chief constable has called for fresh legislation and both sides have spent thousands of pounds hiring lawyers to fight each other. Is the First Minister still laughing?

If the First Minister will forgive me, I will ask him the questions this week, when it matters, before the decisions are taken; he is responsible to Parliament and he should answer the questions. He should not be so complacent. Despite what he says, the chief constable is being stripped of his independence. It gets worse: how can the chief constable be held to account by the Scottish Police Authority when that authority will control many of the services? It will be a jumble and lead to a blame game. Her Majesty’s chief inspector of constabulary for Scotland said that the authority will not be able to hold itself to account. Does the First Minister accept that the legislation is not fit for purpose and must be changed?

I support amendment 7, which is sensible. If we are trying to get a regime that follows the public pound, this is the way in which we should proceed. It seems to be a relatively simple, devolved way of operating that would mean that rather than relying on the retrospective section 5—which is worthy and should always be used—we could have a proactive scheme so that we could keep track of the public pound in the FOI regime. It is sensible, especially given the erosion of the FOI regime’s coverage, to which the Deputy First Minister has alluded, and I think that that is the way in which we should proceed.

I support Michael McMahon’s proposals. I think that we have a problem. We could almost say that there is a crisis in the freedom of information regime. There is a lack of confidence among the public that the Scottish Government and its agencies are acting appropriately. In recent years, there have been a number of incidents in which the Government has withheld information unnecessarily and now there is suspicion among the public about whether the Government is fully embracing the freedom of information regime.

No, not just now. Kevin Dunion said that, at the time of its passage, the 2002 act was “generally viewed as amongst the stronger access to information laws in the world.” However, he went on to say that “Scotland’s FOI regime is at risk of slipping behind other legislatures.” The purpose clause that is proposed in amendment 9 would set out clearly why the legislation is needed and would send a signal to public sector workers as well as ministers that they should be open and embrace openness, because that leads to better government. I support amendment 9.

As I said earlier, the Deputy First Minister referred in a previous contribution to debate on the bill to the fact that there has been an erosion in the coverage of the freedom of information regime. She has tempted us numerous times that she will reveal later on when the list will be reviewed. There is great anticipation—certainly among Liberal Democrats—that that will be done quite soon. The Scottish National Party has been in office for six years, and I do not think that we can wait too much longer to find out which of the other 130 ALEOs are going to be included in the freedom of information regime. When the Deputy First Minister makes that decision, I think that amendment 8 will assist her in making decisions about which ALEOs should be included, because it is really about public function and public funds. The Campaign for Freedom of Information has always focused on ensuring that we follow the public pound when considering freedom of information. I therefore think that what Elaine Murray proposes in her amendments is perfectly sensible, so I support amendments 8 and 1.

The cabinet secretary tempted us into believing that she would make a radical change today and announce a big expansion of the remit of the FOI regime. However, although she says said that the expansion will start, we do not have any timing for when it will happen. It needs to be concluded by the start of the summer recess. If it is not, the Scottish National Party will have been six years in office without having implemented it. That is a great disappointment. We also need to ensure that the changes go way beyond what the cabinet secretary currently plans. Her proposal is a timid response to a demand that has been coming for a long time. I admit that my party’s Administration did not implement such an expansion, but the SNP has been in office six years and has done nothing about it. We cannot wait any longer for the regime to change. I support Elaine Murray’s proposals on timing and frequency of reporting. I am pleased that the cabinet secretary has conceded the change from three years to two years. Elaine Murray’s other proposals are sensible. I hope that the cabinet secretary will review what she has announced today and be much more ambitious than she currently plans to be.

I support Iain Gray’s proposal. It is even more important than I thought it was because of the cabinet secretary’s earlier timid and limited announcement on the extension of FOI. The reversal—the extension of the FOI rights—will not repair the damage caused by the erosion of recent years. I believe that Iain Gray’s proposal will put some of that right, so I support it.

Does the cabinet secretary not accept that reviewing the devolution files is a matter for the officials in the Scotland Office? That is not a political judgment, because those files involved a previous Administration and it would be quite wrong for a subsequent Administration—one of a different political colour—to review them and decide whether they should be released.

I had high hopes for the cabinet secretary. I thought that the words that she uttered in the earlier debate on the bill indicated that she was listening and that she understood; that she was expressing sympathy about the erosion in freedom of information rights that we have seen over the past few years. However, her actions today did not match her words. I was disappointed by her timid response on coverage and unspecified time; Gavin Brown was right to identify that. The SNP has had more than five years in power, and it has been two and a half years or more since the consultation on extending freedom of information rights over the bodies that were specified in section 5 of the 2002 act, but there has been very little action. I hope that the cabinet secretary comes forward with much more ambitious and bolder plans for extending those rights because, as she herself admitted, people’s rights have been eroded. Documents such as the housing charter will just not be sufficient. The freedom of information regime is a tried and tested system that people understand and that they use well. The Government might not like it, but people do use the system. As a Liberal Democrat, I am certainly proud of it and of the fact that Jim Wallace, with the support of other members, pioneered and piloted the bill through Parliament. However, the principles that were established at that time have also been eroded and it is important for us to repair the damage. The cabinet secretary has a lot of work to do to convince us that the amended act represents not just lip service but real change, and that we will see those eroded rights being repaired. The public are with it. The Information Commissioner has done a lot of polling and found that most people are in favour of extending coverage to housing associations, trusts, private sector companies who build and maintain local authority schools, hospitals, and prisons that are run by the private sector. The public is all in favour of those bodies being covered by FOI legislation, so if the cabinet secretary is to stay in step with public opinion she should make that change. It is just not right that tenants in South Lanarkshire can access information about their council and their tenancy while tenants in Glasgow do not have the same rights. The vote on Iain Gray’s amendment was disappointing because the Government did not take the opportunity to send out a clear signal that the housing associations are going to be included. It could have also done that for schools and public-private partnership contractors because the public has a right to know. If the public pound is involved, the public should have the right to know how it is being spent. Keeping that secret does not chime with the FOI principles that were established by the 2002 act. Malcolm Chisholm was right about article 10 of ECHR. The cabinet secretary needs to be careful about that because challenges have been made in the European Court of Human Rights.

Not just now. If they are to make a decision and have freedom of expression, people have a right to information. The Government should be mindful of that.

I am running out of time. The Government also needs to be careful because its reputation on freedom of information has been damaged by going to court on at least two occasions over the legal advice on Scotland in the European Union and also over a local taxation system. Also, in the Ayrshire and Arran case, the FOI regime was seen to be valuable in making sure that we learnt the lessons from the deaths of patients. Freedom of information has real value. It is not just some chattering class discussion; it is about people, their lives, and their rights. I hope that the cabinet secretary lives up to that ambition.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01079)

Two months ago, I asked the First Minister to extend nursery education for two-year-olds. He said that he would consider it. Now that he has had time, what decision has he reached?

All members will welcome the extra provision that the First Minister mentions but, in England, 40 per cent of two-year-olds are to get 15 hours a week of nursery education. The future provision for three and four-year-olds is good but, as the First Minister will know, Professor James Heckman is clear that investment that is made before the age of three gets the best return. Will the First Minister today commit to—or at least give an indication that he is prepared to consider—extra provision for 40 per cent of two-year-olds? That could be transformational and could help disadvantaged children to get a good start in life. I therefore press the First Minister again. Members from all parties, including his own, agree that we should make such provision. Will he take that important step today?

The cabinet secretary knew the difficulties of the NPD model when he announced it back in 2010. Does he now think that what he said back in 2010 was wrong? Is that what he is saying?

On what Mark McDonald just said, I wonder why, if independence would deliver so many jobs and so much success, recovery and prosperity, the SNP is waiting for two years. I presume that it has come up with the answer to that before then. The Liberal Democrats worked constructively on the budget that we voted for budget last year, and I advise the cabinet secretary that we seek to work constructively again this year. That does not mean that we do not have concerns about the budget—we do, and I will outline some of them—but we will work constructively, as we have done before. We will act responsibly in our approach to the budget and, if we want to spend extra money, we will identify where the money should come from. I agree with Mark McDonald on spend-to-save investment in early education and early intervention; we should accelerate that. That is partly why I was so disappointed with the First Minister’s response at First Minister’s question time today to my request for early education for two-year-olds. I remind members that 40 per cent of two-year-olds in England but only 1 per cent of two-year-olds in Scotland are predicted to receive that kind of support. Professor James Heckman has set out numerous times the fact that investing £1 in a two-year-old will bring a return of £11 later. The evidence for that is overwhelming. I understand that Professor Heckman is coming to visit ministers, who will perhaps be able to tell him that they are going to invest in two-year-olds. The finance secretary said earlier that anybody who says that NPD is not a complicated and difficult process should be criticised. I presume that he knew in 2010, when he set out his budget, that it was going to be difficult and complicated. I do not doubt that it is complicated, but I am puzzled as to why, at that time, he boasted about the amount of money that he was going to spend through the complicated and difficult NPD process. Nothing substantial has changed since then. There was a Conservative-Liberal Democrat Government at that time, so he knew what the landscape was going to look like, yet he ploughed ahead and predicted. This year, he is having to make significant reductions, as Gavin Brown said, from £353 million to £20 million. I am not sure what has changed in that time. Perhaps the finance secretary could set that out in his summing up. The Finance Committee’s report is a very good one. It is pretty thorough and looks at the detail in identifying from where the extra capital from revenue has come. The committee is right to have identified that there does not seem to be much clarity about which revenue areas have suffered. On the change funds, the committee is right to ask exactly what the benefit of the extra investment has been. Some groups, including the Scottish Council for Voluntary Organisations—which, I must say, I am not used to quoting—have highlighted concern about where that money is going and where it is coming from. The committee is right to have identified that we need greater monitoring and evaluation of those funds. If we are to convince the sceptics that early intervention is worth while, we need to have the evidence to prove it. An explanation is also needed for why the early years fund seems to have been cut by £14 million. There does not seem to be an explanation from the Government on that, so perhaps the finance secretary could set that out. The committee rightly requests information on whether the Government intends to progress with the Christie commission’s recommendation on a duty to consider preventative measures in budgets. Again, I would welcome a response from the finance secretary on whether there will be a duty on local authorities to consider such matters. The NUS is running its—almost annual—campaign to secure a reversal of the £35 million cut in this year’s funding for further education colleges. That is worthy of support. We have campaigned with the NUS in the past and we will do so again, and we hope that the finance secretary listens. On the funding for Aberdeen City Council, when I asked the finance secretary previously about the floor that the Scottish Government set in previous years whereby each council would receive at least 85 per cent of the Scottish average revenue funding, he reassured me that that would be met. However, nothing seems to be forthcoming on how the Government will meet Aberdeen’s £25 million shortfall. Aberdeen City Council’s current level of funding seems to be at 78 per cent of the Scottish average, which is well short of the 85 per cent floor—hence the £25 million shortfall. We welcome the extra money for social housing that was announced yesterday, but I want to be reassured that the new money will go into genuinely affordable housing. There is concern in the sector about where the money will be targeted.

I was also pleased to see that money is to be given to an Atos project in Forres. I was surprised that the SNP back benchers did not criticise Atos, but I congratulate the finance secretary on identifying a project that will be very good for that part of the country. Considering back benchers’ criticism of Atos in the past, I was surprised that they were not more vocal. With that, I conclude my remarks.

I thank the finance secretary for the advance copy of his statement. In particular, I welcome the very positive news about the extra finance for housing. However, many of the shovel-ready projects that were included in his November list have been excluded today. I want to understand his decision-making process and why he prioritised the projects that he has announced today, rather than the A96, the A68 and the health centres in Aboyne, Inverurie and Stonehaven. Why are those projects less important than the ones that he has announced today? The cabinet secretary has said that he is not going to allocate the full £394 million that has been allocated by the UK Government. However, surely, a project such as the A9 would benefit from having early notice of extra funding so that that essential project could be brought forward.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01053)

As the Government has finally admitted that it will need to negotiate Scotland’s membership of the European Union, can the First Minister tell me whether the voters will know before the referendum what we could lose in those negotiations?

I was not expecting that rather comprehensive answer. The First Minister does not seem to understand that this is about not membership but the terms, and I am surprised that he does not seem to understand that very simple point. This is about the politics of other countries, and the First Minister seems to think that all 27 members of the European Union will just sign up to whatever he wants. Now that, whether the First Minister likes it or not, people doubt what he says, they want to know before the referendum what they might lose. Can he therefore tell me when he plans to meet the other 27 members of the European Union to discuss Scotland’s membership and to establish what they will want in return?

I am not disagreeing.

I thank the Deputy First Minister for advance sight of her statement. The statement at least answers the question that I asked the First Minister earlier today about whether he expects all 27 member states of the European Union simply to sign up to whatever the Scottish Government demands. The answer seems to be, “Yes, the Scottish Government does—to every single thing.” It seems that the Deputy First Minister has some starry-eyed belief that an independent Scotland would never lose out in any negotiation, for the rest of time. Back in reality, can she answer Patricia Ferguson’s question? When does she plan to meet the 27 members of the European Union to establish whether they agree with her claims?

There was no answer! [Laughter.]

First, I put on record my appreciation for the work of John Park. I think that this is the last time that I will speak in the chamber before he departs on Friday. He has been an excellent member of the Scottish Parliament for Mid Scotland and Fife and I will be sad to see him go. He is a great loss to the Parliament. [Applause.] I am here as Tavish Scott’s substitute, because he is not well. I was once a substitute when I was a boy playing football at school, but I was never a great success at that, so members should not get their hopes up. We should all be proud of the section 30 order, because it delivers a mature approach to providing for a referendum in which the people and not the courts will decide on Scotland’s constitutional future. Our party supports votes for 16 and 17-year-olds. We were sceptical about the proposed mechanism in that regard, but we support the policy and are pleased that it is moving forward. The order also delivers a referendum that will be overseen by the Electoral Commission. I hope and am sure that the Scottish Government will give the commission the respect that it is due. I hope that the Government will also recognise that in the referendum there must be losers’ consent. We all need to buy into the process and accept the result. Treating the Electoral Commission with respect in that regard is especially important. Fundamentally, as my colleague Michael Moore said, this is about delivering a legal, fair and decisive referendum, and I believe that the section 30 order does that. We were also pleased that the UK Government was able to help the SNP to deliver its manifesto promise, because otherwise it would have been difficult for it to do so. That promise was to deliver a single-question referendum. We in the Liberal Democrats were pleased to be able to help our colleagues in the Scottish Parliament to deliver a manifesto promise. We also commend Bruce Crawford for the work that he did in the early stages as a Government minister and in the latter stages as a member of the committee. There were extreme voices on either side of the debate: people such as Michael Forsyth in the House of Lords, who believed that it should all be done in London and that nobody in Scotland or in the SNP should be trusted to do any of it, and others who said that London should have nothing to do with it, that it should all be done here and that nobody else should have a say. Bruce Crawford and latterly Nicola Sturgeon, but also my colleague Michael Moore managed to calmly but determinedly see their way through the myriad difficulties in achieving this. They achieved it, and I am pleased that they have done so. However, there is one thing that I want to address. I think that we are slightly exaggerating the significance of paragraph 30. Of course the Government of the remainder of the United Kingdom and the Scottish Government would work constructively. We would expect neighbours to work constructively, and that would be the case. However, it does not necessarily mean that a foreign Government—that of the remainder of the United Kingdom—would accede or agree to every single demand of the foreign Scottish Government. We need to get this in context. Of course there will be respect, and both Governments will respect the outcome. I am sure that they will do that, because they will want to have a long-standing relationship.

That is important, but please, let us put the matter in context. Of course they will agree, but let us not exaggerate the significance. I commend the committee and the clerks for the work that they have done. It has been an excellent process and I hope that it can lead to a referendum debate that we can all be proud of.

I agree that this Parliament needs to consider the matter carefully. Is the First Minister ruling out a United Kingdom independent watchdog, or is that something that he is prepared to consider?

Will the First Minister give way on that point?

Will the First Minister give way?

Presiding Officer, “We desperately wanted to shout out, ‘It’s not true, it’s not true,’ but when it’s your voice against a powerful media, it just doesn’t have weight.” That was the voice of Kate McCann. Her husband, Gerry, went on to say: “We did approach the PCC about these articles, but the then chairman, Sir Christopher Meyer, explicitly told us that it would be better if we were to seek redress through the courts. I found it amazing that the press regulator could do nothing to regulate the press.” Those are just two well-known voices that Lord Leveson heard, but there are many, many more, anonymous voices of people who were not heard during the inquiry, but who have suffered in the same way as the McCanns suffered. Now is the time to act. We must act with sensitivity, but we must act. There are those—including some members of the Scottish Parliament—who say that we should act through legislation only if the press fail to implement the independent watchdog. We might describe that as the one-more-chance principle. In 1953, four years after the royal commission and only after the threat of legislation, we created the General Council of the Press. In 1962, a second royal commission said that there should be self-regulation that was effective. In 1977, a third royal commission said: “We recommend that the press should be given one final chance”. In 1990, Parliament backed the Calcutt committee recommendations for radical improvements to self-regulation. In 1993, the Calcutt review concluded that the PCC was not an effective regulator of the press and recommended the setting up of a press complaints tribunal that was backed by statute. Only last year, David Cameron told the Commons: “I accept we can’t say it’s the last-chance saloon all over again. We’ve done that.” The press has had six chances over six decades. I would say that that is too many chances over too many decades. I heard the Prime Minister say this morning that “the clock is ticking for this to be sorted out”, but the clock has been ticking for six decades. We have had many chances over 60 years. Now is the time to legislate for an independent body. Liberal Democrat members and our colleagues at Westminster support a vigorous free press that holds the powerful to account and which is not subject to political interference, but a free press does not and cannot mean a press that is free to bully innocent people or to abuse grieving families. People who feel that they have been mistreated by powerful newspapers need to know that there is someone who is prepared to stand up for them. If we are to uphold our responsibility and our duty, what the McCanns felt must not be felt by anyone else. That is why we need an independent watchdog that is underpinned by the law, to which people can turn and to which newspapers must listen, and in response to which they must act. We support some of the specific recommendations in the Leveson report. We have some concerns about the role of Ofcom, to which the First Minister referred. We are not quite sure that its duty as a regulator of broadcast media fits well with a role as a recognising body for independent watchdogs. We do not think that that is necessarily the way ahead, but we need to have independent self-regulation overseen by an independent board, which needs to be appointed in an independent, fair, open and transparent way and must have carrots and sticks—incentives—available to it to ensure that people take part in the system. We also need a recognition body, although, as I said, I do not think that it necessarily should be Ofcom. On the cross-border issues, I understand what the First Minister is saying about the responsibility in this Parliament in terms of defamation, but there is another aspect, which is the Ofcom aspect. We cannot have two authenticating or recognition bodies across the UK. If we did, it would mean that Scotland would be restricted to only having an independent watchdog in Scotland. To me, the authentication or recognition body needs to be at a UK level, so that we have the option: if the press in Scotland decides that it will have an independent watchdog just for Scotland, it can choose to do that, because one of the possibilities is that a multitude of bodies might apply to be watchdogs. However, by saying that only this Parliament should authorise or legislate for the authentication body—not the defamation body—we are limiting options and reducing chances; in fact, we are ruling out the possibility of there being a UK-wide independent body. If the First Minister wants to intervene, I will take his intervention.

My mind is very open, and I am trying to have a genuine debate about the issue. Criticising me for trying to have a genuine debate will not encourage open debate in that respect. What the First Minister seems to be saying is that he does not agree with legislating for an authentication body. If that is the case, I will welcome another intervention from him.

Yes, I appreciate that. What the First Minister says seems to be a departure from the Leveson report, which recommended a recognition body. The First Minister may be suggesting an alternative, but it would be better if he was able to set it out to the Parliament in full so that we can understand exactly what he means.

I draw my contribution to a close.

Margo MacDonald made a good contribution, because what she managed to identify, along with many others, is that there are good journalists and that we should not generalise. We often condemn others for generalising about society, groups and minorities. We should not generalise about the press. I hope that the press up in the gallery are still listening. I was reassured by some of the First Minister’s remarks earlier about the potential for a cross-border independent watchdog. If he is saying that it could be the courts—and perhaps the Scottish courts—rather than Ofcom that authenticates or authorises the independent watchdog, and that there could be the potential for dual registration that would allow for UK-wide independent watchdog status for organisations, that would be a step forward. This Parliament does have to take responsibility, but we should recognise that we have passed legislative consent motions in the past and that Westminster is perfectly capable of doing so as well as legislating for Scotland. However, I think that we should see how this develops over time and, if we can do it here, we should do it here. The most important thing in this regard, though, is to consider members of the public who want to make a complaint against the media—doing so should be simple, quick and cheap. If they have to work out which regulatory body they have to go to and that increases the costs, that is something that we should be against. I will look to have discussions on this with the First Minister on Thursday, but if we can achieve a UK-wide independent watchdog in order to make the process simple, that would be a positive thing that I would welcome. However, we should engage at a UK level. I encourage the First Minister to touch base with the UK party leaders and have a discussion with them. I think that his contribution to such a discussion would be helpful. It might help to persuade my colleagues in the UK coalition to see the light and perhaps agree to legislative underpinning of the process. I think that the First Minister’s involvement in that would be welcome. The Prime Minister said back on 7 October that he would implement Leveson if it was not “bonkers”. I do not think that Leveson is bonkers and we have not heard anybody describe it as bonkers since. I therefore hope that the Prime Minister might just look back at what he said on 7 October and agree that legislative underpinning, as a central part of Leveson, is something that we should proceed with. John Mason was right to say that we need to strike a careful balance. It is important that we recognise the freedom of the press as well as the freedom of the public—freedom of the public from bullying and intimidation by newspapers and the freedom of the press to scrutinise people such as me and others in the chamber. It is important that we protect that freedom. We should not go from one extreme to the other and condemn all the press and say that everything they do is wrong, because that is not the case. As Marco Biagi said, the press is already limited by the law—limitations are in place. What we are debating is what the extent of that and of the state’s involvement should be. I think that having legislative underpinning of an independent watchdog is something that we should support. When we talk about independence, we should also recognise that the PCC is hardly independent of politics. Three of the past five chairs of the PCC have been Tory politicians. We could therefore argue that the independent watchdog that we support, underpinned by the law, would be a much more independent body than the PCC currently is. The media should welcome separating the politicians from the press in that regard. It would give the press protections as well. The carrots and sticks that we have talked about would provide protection for the media and would mean that lengthy court cases that cost them a lot of money would not drag on—it would give them some great advantages. Hugh Henry was right when he said that we need a process that is available not just to the wealthy, who can afford to pursue it; it should be for all. Again, cheap, easy, quick redress for members of the public through a process that everybody recognises is something that we support. I commend Colin Keir for being the only SNP back bencher who decided to defend the First Minister on the back of Leveson, but when the First Minister says “cannot be criticised”, he takes it out of context and is quoting selectively. The question for the First Minister is this: if he had his time over again, what would he do? If he was making that phone call to Jeremy Hunt or to Vince Cable, the secretaries of state, what would he do? Would he ask them to take jobs into account and act unlawfully, according to Lord Justice Leveson? That is not what I expect from a First Minister. He cannot simply say that it is their responsibility to take that into account; he needs to recognise that he, as First Minister, also has a responsibility. I do not want to sour a reasonably hopeful and positive contribution—[Interruption.]

There has been a great degree of consensus in the debate. I hope that we can agree to progress a legal underpinning of an independent watchdog so that we can move forward. We cannot repeat the mistakes of the past.

3. A fuller statement on the Leveson report later today would have been appropriate, but I will engage constructively in what the First Minister plans. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-01016)

I was trying to be constructive. On Tuesday, we saw the new chief constable and the police board chair sitting side by side, but facing in opposite directions and in direct conflict on the running of the new police service. Did the First Minister envisage that sort of disarray when he planned the new Scottish police force? Is the problem the people whom he has put in charge, or is it his legislation?

I am glad that the First Minister can joke about this, because it is barely 100 days since royal assent was granted to the Police and Fire Reform (Scotland) Act 2012 and already the plans are in turmoil. Currently 6,000 people work for the police service in civilian support roles—everything from scene of crime officers to headquarters administration staff. We know that hundreds of those people will have to change jobs, move jobs or take redundancy. Does not the First Minister think that those people deserve to know who is taking the decisions about their future and with whom they should try to negotiate? This is his law and it is his people. What is he going to do about it?

I thank the finance secretary for an advance copy of his statement. He complains endlessly that he has no choice, when he knows that he has a choice. He has powers in relation to early retirement, accrual rates, contributions, indexation of past CARE service and much more. The truth is that, when he has been faced with the same decisions as the UK Government, he has taken the same decisions as the UK Government.

I am coming to that. The cabinet secretary complains that 28 months is not long enough—

—to negotiate and implement new pensions, even though he plans to create an independent nation in 16 months.

How much precisely does the cabinet secretary plan to invest in Scottish public sector pensions beyond the UK Government’s proposals?

I thank the finance secretary for providing an advance copy of his statement. Last year, he made a commitment that every council in Scotland would receive at least 85 per cent of the average funding. We supported him last year so that Aberdeen could get extra finance. Since then, the fire and police funding has been reviewed, as the cabinet secretary set out. It now seems that Aberdeen City Council’s funding has fallen to 79 per cent of the average. Can he confirm that he will make up the difference to 85 per cent?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00992)

Just what does it take for the education secretary to lose the confidence of the First Minister?

As usual, the First Minister is an expert on every other Government. The last thing that he is is an expert on his own Government. It is astonishing that, after all that has happened in recent weeks, the First Minister believes that Mike Russell should stay. It is wrong that the First Minister puts his interests above those of the colleges. We know that the relationship with college leaders has been wrecked. Principals will not speak out, in case their colleges suffer. The education secretary has got his figures wrong yet again, according to SPICe. Mike Russell is so out of control that he is even reporting his own Government to the ombudsman. Does the First Minister accept that we need a change of approach, figures that we can all agree and an education secretary who we can trust to deliver? When will he grasp the thistle?

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

I agree with Mr Russell whole-heartedly about moving forward on the challenges that face the colleges but after all the events of recent weeks, does he believe that he is the right man to take that forward?

From the member’s experience, does he think that the education secretary has the absolute confidence of colleges across Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

Will the member give way?

On that point?

Let me return to the member’s earlier remarks. He will have met many principals and chairs across Scotland who are outraged by the cabinet secretary’s behaviour. It is unworthy of him to dismiss their remarks as irrelevant.

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the member give way now?

Will the member give way now?

Will the member take an intervention?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The minister referred to the York report and cited the projected reduction in numbers by 2.1 million by 2016. Does he blame APD for all of that loss?

Airport chiefs are quite clear that there is a multitude of factors. They blame APD in part, but a big proportion of the problem is the economic impact of the recession that we have had. Can the minister split apart what APD and what the economy are responsible for? It is important to get the evidence right.

I accept that cutting APD may lead to economic regeneration, that we may get more benefits to the tourism industry and that there may be wider business benefits from doing so. However, I am not convinced by York Aviation’s report, which has a number of inconsistencies in it. If we are to make decisions about valuable tax take and economic growth, we need to base them on solid evidence. Members should look at some of what I consider to be contradictions in the report. Airport chiefs tell me that the economy—and not just APD—is part of the reason for a reduction in passenger numbers. The report does not separate out what is responsible for which effect. There was a reduction of 1.2 million passengers from 2007, which was when the APD was increased, but that was also when the recession hit the economy the hardest. There seems to be an inability to separate the two issues. The figures also show that passenger numbers have increased from 2010—at a time when APD has increased too. Therefore, there is no simple correlation that, if APD is increased, passenger numbers go down. The report does not necessarily add a contribution to this debate.

Of course it would, but the equation is not as simple as that, because we must consider how the money that APD raises will be spent. In effect, if APD was taken back to 2007 levels, it would mean a reduction of about £90 million this year.

Not just now; I am answering Mr Gibson’s point. If APD is taken forward to 2016 at the same level, it would mean the loss of about £400 million-worth of investment. That is £400 million that could be spent on shovel-ready projects. We have heard numerous demands in this Parliament for the Westminster Government to invest more in shovel-ready projects, but we seem to have had a sudden change in strategy to say that cutting APD is now the single answer to improving our economy. All that I am saying is that we have choices to make, and it cannot be simply said that if we cut APD nothing else bad will happen.

We have worked out from the report the effect of taking the APD levels back to 2007. If Mr Stewart looks at that, he will find out that we are absolutely correct.

The Government’s motion does not even propose to go back to 2007 levels; it is proposing only to freeze APD levels. If the Government freezes the level of APD, it will not recover the 2.1 million lost passengers that the motion and the report set out to recover. There is an inconsistency in that: the Government complains about the loss of 2.1 million passengers, but it is proposing to do very little about it. If the report is to be believed, the action in the motion would have the effect of recovering only 300,000 passengers. That is the difference between the two.

The reason why I am setting out the issues is because it is really important that we understand the effects on passenger numbers and what is causing the reduction. That is why it is important that we wait for the Treasury report that is considering those matters. Reading the York Aviation report would lead someone to conclusions that are simply not correct. The impact of the economy on passenger numbers is significant, but the report ignores it. The report should consider that issue because, as the airport chiefs have told me, it is a consideration worth undertaking. On a point of consensus—

Not just now.

On a point of consensus, we believe that APD should be devolved. We have stated that for some time. That would allow Scotland to target more routes in order to improve route development and to grow long-distance routes, as the minister has pointed out. We support that objective. Our disagreement involves the Government’s assertion that freezing APD or taking it back to its 2007 level will suddenly bring back 2.1 million passengers. I do not believe that the report contains any evidence to support that. At the end of the day, this debate is about choices that politicians have to make. We cannot simply say that shovel-ready projects are the first and most important thing that we can do and then change our strategy the next week simply because we want to have another pop at the UK Government. I move amendment S4M-04874.4, to leave out from “with concern” to end and insert: “the debate around the future of air passenger duty (APD); agrees that APD should be a tax exercised at a Scottish level by the Parliament as part of a federal UK, with tax powers and responsibilities shared between different levels of government in the UK; notes that returning the level of APD to 2007 levels as discussed in a recent York Aviation report would result in a loss of around £90 million to the Scottish Government, and calls on those who advocate such a change to set out their proposals to reduce public spending to match the reduction in tax receipts.”

Will the member give way?

The issue here is the return on the investment that is made. It is not necessarily the case that we would not get a return on cutting APD—indeed, that is not what I am saying. I am saying that the SNP Government needs to consider the best return and so far—there is some evidence to support this—capital is the best way of investing because that gets the best return. What is Mr Gibson’s evidence that cutting APD would give a similar return?

Were the industry representatives able to give the member any advice about how to make up for the revenue that would be lost if APD was reduced?

At times, today’s debate has been like a parliamentary edition of the BBC “Holiday” programme. Helen Eadie told us about her trips to eastern Europe—perhaps she could enlighten us a bit more in the future—and Kenneth Gibson talked about all the flights that he has been dreaming about, including to Cuba, I suspect. The debate has been quite useful, but it has looked at only one part of the equation. Whenever the Parliament makes choices, it needs to consider everything in the round, including what Patrick Harvie passionately described in terms of the climate change targets. We need to consider that because we sit here and make bold claims about climate change legislation, but do we follow it through when it comes to making decisions on individual projects and spending areas? We fall short on many of those occasions. I share Patrick Harvie’s passion. I do not always agree with the extreme measures that he might take, but I believe that climate change is such a serious issue that we need to consider it in today’s debate. The substance of the motion is actually rather timid and cowardly. It looks at the 2.1 million passengers that, it claims, have been lost to Scotland’s airports, but only proposes to remedy that loss by 300,000 by freezing APD levels. At no point during the debate has any single member, in response to me or any other member, spelled out how that will be paid for. As I have already said, if APD is frozen, it will cost £90 million per year. Where will that come from? That is what we need to consider. If we are going to go further, as Kevin Stewart and Annabelle Ewing and others suggested, and take APD for long-haul flights down to zero, that will be an additional cost in order to compete—as those members say—with Northern Ireland.

Not just now. We need to consider such issues in the round. We cannot simply proclaim the benefits of one half of the equation, and not live up to our responsibilities in the Parliament to spell out how we are going to pay for it. Many members have called for the devolution of APD, and I support that, because it would allow us to do some of the things that we would like to try, as Stewart Stevenson pointed out in a very informative way. We could take practical measures and have a much more precise APD scheme that would cover Scotland’s special needs. Stewart Stevenson’s contribution to the debate was very good. Kenny Gibson must have been dreaming, because I said that we were in favour of devolving APD. Brian Adam described the powers that we in the Parliament need to make decisions. However, when the Government has been given the opportunity to do something about flights to the islands through the air discount scheme, it has failed miserably. The Government needs to think again. If it is to have APD powers, it needs to think about using them properly.

Not just now. The Government should not use the issue just as a tool to make the case for independence. We need to consider the matter on its merits and not in that wider debate. We need to consider the environment. I do not think that a single SNP member—apart from Stewart Stevenson—referred to the environment; I apologise if I have omitted someone. However, several members—including Sandra White, Michael Matheson, Joe FitzPatrick, Jamie Hepburn, Stuart McMillan and Bob Doris—signed a motion in 2007 that talked about tackling aircraft emissions and supported air passenger duty. I do not know whether those members have changed their minds and regret their initial decision, or whether they find it difficult to live up to the consequences of what they claimed to support. The central issue is that we need to consider everything in the round. Of course the Treasury should look at the matter.

I always feel suitably chided by Helen Eadie. She is of course right: she referred to environmental issues, and I apologise profusely for making such a claim about her. However, the emphasis in many speeches was on passenger numbers and increasing the number of flights and was not on the environment—the focus was in the wrong place. That is not to say that we should not encourage the provision of direct flights, which are more environmentally sustainable. However, the emissions from flights are considerable. We need to consider that if we are to achieve our climate change ambitions, as Patrick Harvie says. As a member of the cross-party group on Pakistan, I support Hanzala Malik’s ambition for direct flights to Lahore, which are important because a big community here needs easy access to Pakistan. That is an example of a decision that we need to take, but simply saying that we need to cut the duty—in some cases to zero—is wrong. Let us consider such things in the round, not in isolation, and let us do so carefully, because the issue is not as straightforward as many members would like to think.

Will the minister take an intervention?

I apologise to the minister for not letting him in, like Helen Eadie. Does he support taking APD levels back to 2007 levels, or will he stop complaining about the 2 million lost passengers?

I hear what the cabinet secretary says about the way in which the legislation was developed in the first place. She is right about that. However, it has been suggested that we should have an almost prospective approach, so that public authorities that are, for example, considering transferring responsibilities to trusts or arm’s-length external organisations should, at that point, consider whether the organisation should be subject to FOI requirements. In other words, rather than our making retrospective changes, public authorities should make that judgment at the time, so that we do not always have to play catch-up. Is that something that the cabinet secretary would consider?

The Deputy First Minister said that as a result of the formation of more ALEOs and trusts there has been an erosion of access to information. The campaign is right to say that less information is available than was the case when we passed the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002.

I want to make an admission: I am not a royal watcher, and I want to join Gavin Brown’s royal coalition. I do not think that the royal exemption is one of the major issues in the bill. I am much more concerned about the other issues, such as the extension, and I think that we should focus on the main thrust of what we are trying to achieve with freedom of information. We have a serious problem in the public sector, as a culture of secrecy and a kind of game playing is developing in many organisations, from the police to the NHS to central Government. We need to address that because, if we do not, it will undermine the whole FOI regime. In recent months, we saw how Rab Wilson did great work in using information gained through FOI to expose a major flaw in Ayrshire and Arran about learning lessons from deaths. There could not be a better example of the use of the FOI regime. It is not just for journalists and politicians who want to get one over on someone; it makes a real difference to people’s lives. That is why it is important that we address the erosion that the Deputy First Minister spoke about.

Both things are necessary. We need to send a clear signal that we are not suspicious of or cautious about freedom of information and that we welcome and embrace it. The bill gives us an opportunity to do that. However, we have to ensure that management understands the position. I have heard lots of different examples of people trying to play games and withhold information. We need to encourage people to be much more open so that we can learn lessons from our mistakes. We need to address that issue because, as the Deputy First Minister has said, there has been an erosion. Lots of public money is now no longer under public scrutiny. The public can access information about Barlinnie, but not about Kilmarnock prison. Tenants in South Lanarkshire can get information about their landlord, but Glasgow tenants cannot, because their landlord is a housing association. In East Lothian, responsibility for leisure facilities was transferred to an arm’s-length organisation, which meant, again, that the information was not available. Those are examples of the issues that we need to address. I was pleased with the tone of the Deputy First Minister’s comments. I welcome what she said about there being an annual review. I hope that that is followed through quickly so that there can be a regular review and we can deal with the many organisations that have now fallen outwith public scrutiny. However, I disagreed whole-heartedly with Bruce Crawford’s remarks about the economy. It was an argument almost against freedom of information. I know that he endorses FOI, but to argue that there are certain circumstances—including those that involve the economy—in which it should be suspended is not worthy. We need to embrace it. It is an issue that helps us to learn how to govern properly and no excuses, including the economy, should be used. FOI should be seen not as a burden, but as an opportunity. There is an opportunity in the bill to make the necessary changes. I have suggested that there should be an opportunity for public authorities to make a designation at the time of the creation of new bodies, when they could consider whether they should be included in the FOI regime. That would mean that we would not have to play catch-up on an annual basis or even more frequently. We need to create the opportunity for that to be done at the time, which will require both an amendment to the bill and the annual review that the Deputy First Minister talked about. The Deputy First Minister also mentioned the need to consider other avenues for public access to information. Kevin Dunion has commented on that. He said: “My second concern is the view being expressed that other initiatives can improve access to information held by those bodies, so that designation is not necessary. However welcome efforts at greater transparency may be, none can provide the benefits of FOISA, namely a statutory right to information and in particular the right for a dissatisfied requester to appeal to the Commissioner.” That process is well known, well tried and well tested. People know that they can use freedom of information legislation to get access to information. Other members, including Michael McMahon, have commented that the other mechanisms are not as tried and tested and that people are not as familiar with them. I think that we should stick with what works. We should extend the coverage so that we make steps back to the ground that we have lost in recent months. Iain Gray is right when he says that there has been a loss of confidence in the Government on freedom of information because of numerous episodes, many of which he referred to. The one thing that the Government could do to dispel that perception is change the bill in the way that I have described and extend the coverage so that we can get the principle of following the money. If public money is involved, people have a right to know.

I am not sure that anybody suggests that the bill should contain a list of organisations. I talked about a purpose and about public authorities being able, when creating a new body, to determine that it should be included in the regime. I did not suggest including a list in the bill.

The cabinet secretary implied that she is not in favour of considering an approach whereby there is a pre-ruling on FOI by public authorities in relation to new organisations that are being considered or created. Is she ruling that approach out or will she consider it in future?

Yesterday, the Deputy First Minister and Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure, Investment and Cities was quoted as saying, “We now know” that building a high-speed link within 12 years that cuts journey times to 30 minutes is possible. Can the minister point to a single piece of documented evidence that backs up that claim?

I whole-heartedly agree with the minister on eye checks, the investment in which has been extremely valuable. However, I return him to the motion, which says that “the only way that these universal services and benefits can be protected and maintained is through independence for Scotland.” If the Scottish National Party loses the referendum, what will happen to universal benefits?

I will give a bit of advice to George Adam. If he wants to get far in the SNP, he should not accuse Angus Robertson of talking “nonsense” and he should not accuse Stewart Stevenson of being a clown. [Laughter.] Johann Lamont and I disagree on much, but I do not doubt her sincerity; I do not doubt that she cares about the future of Scotland. Probably every member of the Scottish Parliament cares about the future of Scotland. It does not serve the debate well for members of the SNP to accuse members of the Labour Party of not caring. That is simply not the case; we are all here because we care. The big challenges that Scotland faces should be at the forefront of our minds. Gavin Brown talked about the demographic challenges, including the 50 per cent increase in the number of over-60s by 2033, which will put huge pressure on our public services.

I will not, just now. There are massive pockets of deprivation. Climate change is a massive responsibility and we have already missed our emissions targets. We face challenges on sustainable growth and on coming out of the recession and tackling high unemployment. Poor health is another challenge. In some areas of Scotland, healthy life expectancy is about 20 years lower than it is in our best-off areas. Those are the big challenges that we should have at the forefront of our minds, and tackling them is the golden principle. Universalism is not a golden principle. The Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party supported many policies including free dental and eye checks, concessionary bus travel, free tuition and free personal care. We delivered on those policies—they were not the SNP’s ideas; the Liberal Democrats and the Labour Party delivered on them, working together. We believe in elements of universalism, but it is not the golden principle. If we think that universalism is the golden principle, we should not be charging for any dental treatment in Scotland, but there are charges for dental treatment in Scotland. If the SNP believed absolutely that universalism was a golden principle it would abolish those charges.

I will not, just now. The SNP says that it wants free education, but colleges charge for courses. If the SNP thinks that universalism is a golden principle, why does it not come forward with proposals to abolish such charges? It does not do so because universalism is not a golden principle. There are charges for social care and for residential care. Universalism is not a golden principle. We support elements of the approach, but that does not mean that it must apply everywhere. It is about return on investment. That is why the cabinet secretary was right when he talked about the £70 million investment in eye checks having a £440 million return. That is a good return for the investment. The policy has improved people’s health. People go and get their eyes checked, because they know that it will not cost them anything, and an awful lot more problems are being identified as a result. Preventative health is at the centre of the policy. Free personal care, which enables people to stay in their homes, is a good investment. Especially in the light of the coming demographic changes, we must find a new way of looking after people, because the current models of care are challenging. On tuition fees, despite what we have done down south, I think that it improves social mobility. People from all sorts of backgrounds are encouraged to go to university. It is a good investment—it is a great return in terms of what we get back.

We can have a separate debate about immigration, but it is not the centre of this debate. This is about the choices that Scotland faces; it is not about whether the Labour Party has bad intentions and everybody else has good intentions. It is about the choices that we make—the return for the investment. Today we have had an admission from the SNP that if it does not win independence, universalism—which it has developed with prescription charges and which we and the Labour Party developed in other areas—will go. That is what the SNP is saying in the motion—that the only way to secure those things is for the SNP to win in the referendum. It is saying that if it does not win the referendum, those things go—so much for the golden principle of universalism. We need a little bit more honesty from the SNP. Enter this debate, because it is a debate that is well worth having. I think, for what it is worth, that we should be looking to invest in nursery education because the return on investment that we can get from investing in two-year-olds getting 15 hours of nursery education could change their lives forever. Studies show that £1 invested now could return £11 later. In England, they are making significant progress towards 40 per cent of two-year-olds—the most impoverished—getting 15 hours of nursery education. I do not hear that from the SNP here, despite repeated requests to it to do so. That is the kind of investment that we should be looking for. It is not whether universalism is right or wrong, it is the return that we get for the investment.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00950)

I was shocked this morning to read the Daily Record. [Laughter.] In the Daily Record this morning—and this is serious—pharmacists were being condemned as “methadone barons”. Does the First Minister think that it is right for front-line health professionals to be attacked for simply carrying out the Government’s drugs strategy—a strategy that has been agreed across the parties in this Parliament?

I thank the First Minister for that very sensible response. I am reassured by what he said. We are now in the situation in which the people who are being attacked by MSPs are not drug dealers or pushers, but the pharmacists in the community who are working on the drugs programme. It is not easy work. I have seen the work that they do, and it is not pleasant, but it benefits everyone. The use of methadone has cut deaths and disease, and it cuts crime. As the First Minster said, MSPs should not seek to close down treatment options or to attack the staff who deliver them. The scandal is not the provision of methadone for drug users, but that drug addiction remains so rampant in one of the world’s wealthiest nations. What leadership can the First Minister provide so that our drugs strategy is based on evidence and the expertise of our health professionals?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00950)

I was shocked this morning to read the Daily Record. [Laughter.] This is serious. In the Daily Record this morning, pharmacists were being condemned as “methadone barons”. Does the First Minister think that it is right for front-line health professionals to be attacked for simply carrying out the Government’s drugs strategy—a strategy that has been agreed across the parties in this Parliament?

I thank the First Minister for that very sensible response. I am reassured by what he said. We are now in the situation in which the people who are being attacked by MSPs are not drug dealers or pushers, but the pharmacists in the community who are working on the drugs programme. It is not easy work. I have seen the work that they do, and it is not pleasant, but it benefits everyone. The use of methadone has cut deaths and disease, and it cuts crime. As the First Minster said, MSPs should not seek to close down treatment options or to attack the staff who deliver them. The scandal is not the provision of methadone for drug users, but that drug addiction remains so rampant in one of the world’s wealthiest nations. What leadership can the First Minister provide so that our drugs strategy is based on evidence and the expertise of our health professionals?

Will the member take an intervention?

I, too, thank the minister for bringing this debate to the chamber, because I think that it is a useful airing of an important issue. There are about 60,000 drug users in Scotland. I met one of them, whom I will call Mary, when I visited Turning Point Scotland’s facility in Glasgow. She had a young son and her ambition was to be able to take her young son to school in the morning after giving him breakfast. That was her lofty ambition—something that for us would be quite normal. If we have kids, we do such things every day, but for her it was an amazing ambition, because she did not see in what circumstances she could achieve it. Her son was getting looked after by her brother on an almost permanent basis. I said that about Mary because we talk about big numbers and big programmes, but at the end of the day people like Mary are normal people who deserve a chance like anyone else. Some of the ways in which we talk about them and whether they do or do not contribute to society demonise them but, for me, they deserve a chance. They would love to go back and have another chance, and we should respect them for the tremendously difficult challenges that they go through. They go in and out of drug use; sometimes they are in remission and sometimes they relapse and go back into serious drug use. Such is the chaotic life that those people lead. Mary was on methadone, along with 24,000 other people. However, for me the central methadone issue is about health professionals choosing the right way to proceed. It is not for politicians to decide which treatments can and cannot be used; it is about giving the health professionals the tools. They have the evidence and the know-how and are the best people to make decisions to help people out of their circumstances. Recovery means different things for different people. Sometimes it is about being able to stay alive; for other people it is about getting back into work. For Mary, it is about being able to take her son to school in the morning. That is why it is regrettable to see some of the stuff that has been happening in the Daily Record, supported by some in the Labour Party. Demonising pharmacists just for doing their job is deeply regrettable. Often, we focus only on the medical aspects of drug use, but much of the issue is to do with a person’s whole life experience. Perhaps they have mental health problems, housing problems or debt. Perhaps they have a chaotic family life and have been divorced. Perhaps they have had experiences in the military that have led them into drug use or alcohol use. We must sort out those issues as well if we expect people to recover long term. However, we must also recognise that sometimes people will have a chaotic lifestyle for some time. The simplistic view is that somehow we can get people into recovery automatically, if only we change one little thing, but that is just not going to happen. I have been to some projects, including the Lothian and Edinburgh abstinence programme—LEAP—in Edinburgh. I saw its abstinence regime. It is not right for everybody, but it is right for some people. They brought the whole family in to share the experience and ensure that people were able to recover on a long-term basis. It is a shame on this country that we have such a high proportion of drug users when we have such wealth. Poverty—the pockets of poverty that we have in many communities—is the root of much of the situation. Again, we must deal with that if we are to expect any longer-term benefits.

I accept that, but a lot of it is associated with poverty and we should not ignore that. On methadone, the HIV rate among drug users in Russia, where they do not have the same kind of programmes as we have in Scotland, is about one in three. In Scotland it is less than one in 20. I do not know what more evidence we need than that simple statistic. In addition, lots of scientific studies show that hepatitis C is reduced by about 80 per cent as a result of needle-exchange and methadone programmes. Elish Angiolini’s report on Cornton Vale shows that when a lot of the women sent to the prison were taken off the methadone programme, the self-harm rates shot up. That is no coincidence, because significant benefit can be got from methadone. Annabel Goldie is right when she says that the treatment is not necessarily right for everyone and is not perfect, and I accept that. However, we should not say that methadone is the reason why so many people are dying, because it is not. Other drugs were involved in 60 per cent of the cases in which someone’s death was connected to methadone, and alcohol was involved in 40 per cent.

Further, in many of those cases, the methadone was illicit, rather than being part of a programme. To simply say that all of those people are dying because of methadone is wrong. Methadone is part of the solution, not part of the problem. We need to be careful about demonising the programme and the pharmacists, because we might undermine the good work that is under way. I move amendment S4M-04719.2, to insert at end: “; recognises the harm reduction value of opiate replacement therapies as part of the recovery strategy, particularly in terms of reducing the transmission of serious blood-borne viruses such as HIV and hepatitis C, and considers it vital that a wide range of treatment options are available to ensure that professionals are able to offer a package of treatment and support that is person-centred and tailored to the specific needs and aspirations of the individual.”

I have quite enjoyed the debate. I admit that I sometimes do not pay attention throughout a debate, but today I did. There were some excellent speeches. The core of the debate was the speeches from Richard Simpson, Jim Eadie and Dennis Robertson, who talked about the need for a personalised approach based on evidence and pragmatism, almost, that is professional led. One of the most powerful phrases to be used came from Christine Grahame, who talked about the “personal prison” of addiction. The drug addicts to whom I have spoken have talked about their situation in those terms. It must be hell that they cannot escape from that prison. Christine Grahame made a very useful contribution. George Adam and Jamie Hepburn addressed the cost to pharmacies of dispensing methadone. That is not just the cost of procuring the drug; there is the cost of the consulting room, the cost of closed-circuit television for security, the cost of extra staff support, the cost of monitoring and the cost of extra training. There is also the cost of displaced business, to which Margo MacDonald referred. We should not just think that the apparently big sums that pharmacists receive are pure profit, because that is not the case. The costs can go way above that. The Scottish Drugs Forum has provided a useful analysis on drug deaths this year that includes the point that there may have been a “heroin drought” that has led to greater experimentation and poly-drug use, including methadone—perhaps the topping up to which Duncan McNeil referred. We need to look behind some of the figures for the reasons why things have happened rather than accept simplistic headlines. There are very few cases in which there is one single cause for a drugs overdose, as there are often multiple drug uses as well as other issues. In what I thought was quite a careful contribution, Duncan McNeil talked about how some people just will not recover. We have to consider the point that some people cannot be saved. That is a hard thing to say, as Duncan McNeil rightly pointed out. Again, it should be in the hands of the professionals to make that judgment, but we have to accept that some people might not recover at all.

That is absolutely certain. I am not talking about cutting these people off at all. We need just to recognise that some people have different motivations and we need to ensure that the service that we provide for them is applicable to them.

Richard Simpson addressed that point as well. We need to make the right decisions about the care and treatment that we provide for people. The member makes a valid point. It is a difficult subject to raise, but I think that what has been said about it is a great contribution to the debate. One concern is that some of the big services are not sensitive enough to the individual patient need—we are talking about patients here—and are not able to provide the alternatives quickly enough. I agree that we need to look at how some of the bigger services provide those services. I have been out and about and I have met many drug addicts in Turning Point in Glasgow, which has former addicts who go out to the community to try to help people who are in crisis. They are able to communicate in a way that many others are not able to do. On the links to poverty, Neil Findlay is absolutely correct that housing and many other issues are often the root cause. The supported housing schemes in Glasgow, which are able gradually to move people back into the community and gradually change the support provided to them, are another good service. A few years ago, I visited the toastie club in the middle of Dunfermline. I thought that I was dressing down for the occasion—I had put on my jeans and I thought that I looked scruffy—but everyone scarpered as soon as I arrived. They disappeared for about 15 or 20 minutes and then, one by one, they gradually came back in. They must have thought that I was a police officer or something. I thought that I looked appropriate to the circumstances, but they spotted me straight away. My point in saying that is that Duncan McNeil is right that communities are feeling the pressure, and we need to recognise that. There is a big divide between drug users and the communities in which they live. I put up a Facebook posting about drug use the other day, and the response showed that a lot of people believe that drug users should be cut off. We need to recognise that there is a huge divide. People do not understand why drug users receive support, and we have a big job to do to convince people about the merits of providing support. In many ways, the methadone programme and other support services are enlightened self-interest in ensuring that our communities are safe. We need to look beyond that, we need to work together and I am glad that we have a consensus.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00930)

The First Minister and I agree that it would be unlikely that an independent Scotland would be excluded from the European Union. Members: “Unlikely”? I am afraid that the SNP has missed the point; the issue is the terms. Has the First Minister secured any agreements with the 27 countries of the European Union to show that they will approve his detailed terms for Scotland’s place in Europe?

The First Minister must get agreement from 27 countries—not just the opinion of the European Commission. Mr Avery said that Scotland’s terms of membership would be subject to agreement with the 27 other Governments, so it is hard to believe that the First Minister does not have one single agreement. He clearly thinks that all 27 countries will just sign up to whatever he wants. The issue is not just about the specific legal advice that he did or did not ask for, or the academic opinion that he either cites or ignores: it is also about the domestic politics of other countries. The First Minister might not like this, but other people now doubt what he says. They want to know—for sure—what they may lose, before they vote in any referendum. He has no agreements with other countries, so when does he expect to get them, or will it be “Vote first and ask questions later”?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00930)

The First Minister and I agree that it would be unlikely that an independent Scotland would be excluded from the European Union. Members: “Unlikely”? I am afraid that the SNP has missed the point; the issue is the terms. Has the First Minister secured any agreements with the 27 countries of the European Union to show that they will approve his detailed terms for Scotland’s place in Europe?

The First Minister must get agreement from 27 countries—not just the opinion of the European Commission. Mr Avery said that Scotland’s terms of membership would be subject to agreement with the 27 other Governments, so it is hard to believe that the First Minister does not have one single agreement. He clearly thinks that all 27 countries will just sign up to whatever he wants. The issue is not just about the specific legal advice that he did or did not ask for, or the academic opinion that he either cites or ignores: it is also about the domestic politics of other countries. The First Minister might not like this, but other people now doubt what he says. They want to know—for sure—what they may lose, before they vote in any referendum. He has no agreements with other countries, so when does he expect to get them, or will it be “Vote first and ask questions later”?

Will the Deputy First Minister comment on last week’s remarks by my colleague Michael Moore, who said that there was nothing that prevented the Government from seeking legal advice before the Edinburgh agreement?

It is true that the north to south walk from the top to the bottom of Scotland presents an opportunity for tourism and economic growth. Nevertheless, as today’s debate is about the First Minister’s word, he should be here, responding to these claims. Before I go further, I make it clear that this is all about confidence in the First Minister, which was shattered last week not really because of the contradiction between what the Deputy First Minister said last week and what the First Minister said in March, but because they continue to say that those two statements are not contradictory. It is not possible for both what Nicola Sturgeon said and what Alex Salmond said to be right. I have tried to understand what this is about and to put myself in the position of the Deputy First Minister and the First Minister as they make their desperate attempts. On 13 September, the First Minister said in response to a question from me that I seemed “to be doubting the legal advice even before it is published.”—[Official Report, 13 September 2012; c 11413.] What exactly did he mean? Did he mean the legal advice in terms of the debate that underpinned all Government documents that had ever been published in the past six years, or the legal advice that, even though it did not actually exist, he went to court to keep secret, wasting taxpayers’ money and fighting the Scottish Information Commissioner? This is nonsense—and the SNP members know it is nonsense. I would have thought that the Scottish Government would welcome the Labour Party’s proposal for a judicial inquiry. The present situation is bad for Scotland; confidence in what ministers say to us has been shattered. Two ministers said opposite things. They cannot both be right, and scrutiny by a judge would allow the Scottish Government to regain trust. As a result, I support the Labour Party’s proposal. Even more significant is what last week’s statement means for the wider debate on an independent Scotland’s membership of the EU. The SNP expects us to believe its assertions, but by its admission it has just been guessing. It did not have the legal advice that would have underpinned its assertions; it has just been guessing about Scotland’s continuing membership of the EU. This is so important because independence is not just like any other piece of legislation, which can be repealed. There is no going back. Once you become independent, there is no turning back. You are gone. You are separate. People should not have to guess about the terms of being a member of the European Union. It is not as if Scotland would not be a member. There is no doubt that an independent Scotland would be—I am not denying that. [Interruption.] The issue is the terms on which Scotland would be a member of the European Union, and those terms could be significant. We are just into a big guessing game now, and we cannot simply rely on guesses. If the SNP is wrong in its assertion that we would be an automatic member of the European Union, it could be extremely significant. [Interruption.] I said “automatic member”; SNP members should listen very carefully. Perhaps, like any other new member of the European Union, we would have to join the euro and the fiscal stability pact. That means that the Scottish deficit would need to be reduced from 7.2 per cent—[Interruption.] Members should listen, because they might learn something. The deficit would need to be reduced from 7.2 to 3 per cent of gross domestic product. That would mean £5 billion off the budget or £5 billion on taxes. That is £1,000 for every man, woman and child in Scotland. That could be the price to pay.

No.

The SNP says that it wants Scotland to decide its future by itself, but the SNP wants an independent Scotland to be forced to choose between keeping the pound, under the control of a foreign UK Government, and adopting the euro, which would cost us billions. Alex Salmond wants Scotland to choose between a pound rock and a euro hard place. And that is just on the currency. With Schengen and the rebate, there is so much more that is under question. We cannot let the SNP members off the hook. They want a decision—a permanent act—to end a country. Those who advocate such a change need to set out the legal basis, which must be shared. They need to convince not just the Cabinet—which I suspect is already convinced about Scottish independence—but all 27 cabinets across the European Union. Nicola Sturgeon is right that this issue is about not just legalities but politics, including the domestic politics of countries across the European Union. As we all heard last week, the Spanish Foreign Minister has cast doubt on our automatic membership and has said that we would need to go to the end of the queue. We have heard today of another Spanish intervention. Domestic Spanish politics has a direct impact on our politics, and those who ignore that are ignoring the realities of the debate. We cannot simply wait for a Spanish veto in 2015.

No. We cannot simply wait for that veto. We need to know now. That is why the Scottish Government needs to start to publish the basis of the legal evidence and it needs to show that the rest of the European Union—all 27 members—agree with that basis. We cannot simply guess on the basis that the SNP is right in every single assertion that it makes. This is too important. We cannot turn back if we go for an independent Scotland. We need to know now. Otherwise, the SNP is expecting Scots to take a step into the dark and vote in the referendum without the knowledge of what that dark means. The First Minister and the Deputy First Minister cannot both be right. Their complicated explanations have reassured no one. The public know that they have been caught out, and they need to come clean. Finally, given the significant doubt over what the SNP tells us, the level of proof that the public requires is now significantly higher. That means that the SNP needs to show us the legal basis of joining the European Union, the terms on which Scotland would join the European Union and that all 27 member countries of the European Union are agreed on that. Without that, people will have very much doubt about what the SNP tells us. I move amendment S4M-04594.2, to insert at end: “, and, in moving forward to publication of the white paper on independence, calls for the full legal case and basis for Scotland’s terms for continued membership of the EU, including consideration of whether Scotland might be required to join the euro or the fiscal stability pact, to be published alongside evidence that the case has been accepted across Europe.”

Will the member give way?

I was intrigued by Rob Gibson’s new plan for Europe. I am not sure whether he is planning to be an EU commissioner who designs this great new Europe, under the SNP, with this great influence, but it was more fantasy than fact. I will return to the point about the euro later. In the debate, the SNP spent a lot of time criticising the Labour Party and saying that it is not positive, but I do not think that I heard a single positive word from the SNP in its criticism of the Labour Party. If members are going to try to be positive, I give them one bit of advice: they should try to be positive when they are doing it. It tends to work. Bob Doris’s speech was a wee bit more moderate—it is the new Bob Doris—but he then proceeded to use all the derogatory language that he criticised other people for using. I offer him another bit of advice: if he does not want to use derogatory language, he should not use derogatory language.

I am glad that Mary Scanlon got her opportunity to make a full speech. [Laughter.] She is right, though, because the one thing that Aileen McLeod omitted to say is that Sweden has a derogation, and she could not guarantee that Scotland would have one. That is the point about all of this: the SNP cannot guarantee anything. It is all guesswork. SNP members can point to their favourite lawyers, European commissioners or members of the European Parliament who say certain things, but they fail to give any credit to people who have a contrary point of view.

Not just now. There is doubt—that is the whole point. Because there is no return and no way back from the creation of an independent nation—it is not like a normal bill—we need a greater level of proof and a higher degree of certainty. That is why we need the Scottish Government to show us the legal basis of its legal advice. It also needs to show that the 27 members of the European Union agree with that. If it does not do that, it is clear that the step would be a step into the dark, because we would not know the future.

Not just now. The point about the Edinburgh agreement was interesting. I was under the clear impression that it is really an agreement about the referendum. I accept that the UK Government has agreed within the process that it will accept the result, but that does not oblige the United Kingdom to agree to every single demand of an independent Scotland, and it would be silly for it to be required to do so. That is what the SNP seems to think that it means, but it does not. It is simply about a process to get to the referendum. I am sure that the United Kingdom Government will be reasonable if Scotland goes independent—it is a reasonable country—but it will not simply agree to every demand that an independent Scotland thinks it is entitled to make, especially if it is against the interests of the 27 members of the European Union and the interests of the United Kingdom. The Edinburgh agreement is about the process for the referendum—the section 30 order. It is for nothing more than that. The SNP needs to understand what it has signed up to. This is about more than simply legal advice; it is about politics. The Spanish foreign minister, from whom I am sure the SNP does not like to hear, said: “In the hypothetical case of independence, Scotland would have to join the queue and ask to be admitted”. SNP members cannot ignore that.

Jamie Hepburn makes my point, which is that there are contrary views. John Mason hit the nail on the head: there is no absolute certainty about this. However, because the process is about creating an independent country, we need more certainty, especially because the First Minister and the Deputy First Minister have been making contradictory statements about whether they had the legal advice in the first place.

Helen Eadie is right. There needs to be an inquiry. If SNP members refuse to have one in committee, they are letting Scotland down. Helen Eadie was right to refer to Neil MacCormick because there is doubt. Even the SNP admits that there would have to be a negotiation. By that very admission, it implies that there would have to be a bit of give and take. If there is give and take, we lose something. That is the potential in an independent Scotland. At the end of this debate, we need certainty. SNP members do not want to give us certainty; they just want to give us assertions. After last week’s shambolic showing from the Scottish Government, we desperately need that certainty.

I thank the Deputy First Minister for the advance copy of her statement. I commend her for managing to ignore the siren voices that urged rejection of a section 30 order. Instead, she sought a mature agreement with the Secretary of State for Scotland, so that the referendum can be decided by the people and not by the courts. From today, it will be based on actual law, rather than imaginary law. I feel the Deputy First Minister’s embarrassment in relation to the European Union. The First Minister said that his white paper would be consistent with the legal advice, but she has had to tell us that he has none—it was all imaginary. The same issue applied to the second question, but now the position is at least based on actual responses rather than imaginary responses. All that work was supposed to be informed by Professor Tierney—the First Minister’s expert adviser—but we have heard not one mention of his work today. When will he speak?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I am told that the Scottish Information Commissioner has just stated that the figure for the cost of the legal challenge regarding the European Union advice that the Deputy First Minister just gave does not include taxpayer-funded legal costs. Can the Presiding Officer advise me whether the Deputy First Minister can be given the opportunity now or later this afternoon to clarify the cost that she has just outlined?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. There is an important matter that needs to be addressed. I apologise for interrupting the debate. Earlier today, the Deputy First Minister told the chamber that the Scottish Government had not sought legal advice on an independent Scotland’s continuing membership of the European Union. However, in an interview with Andrew Neil from the BBC in March the First Minister said, in response to a question on whether he had sought advice from his own Scottish law officers, “We have, yes ... Everything that we have said is consistent with the legal advice we have received.” Those two statements cannot both be true. Either the First Minister has misled this chamber since the spring or the Deputy First Minister has misled the chamber today. Can the Presiding Officer advise whether an early opportunity can be provided to allow the First Minister to clarify this serious matter?

Further to my earlier point of order, Presiding Officer. Despite the First Minister’s attempt, I am afraid that he has not cleared up the matter. He was asked a simple question by Andrew Neil, who is a respected journalist for the BBC. He was asked if he had sought the advice of his law officers. He said, “We have, yes.” It was a straightforward question and he answered, “Yes, we have received advice from the law officers.” The First Minister went on to say—

I will bring my remarks to a close. This is a very serious matter, Presiding Officer, because the First Minister has not cleared up the issue. He said, “Everything that we have said is consistent with the legal advice we have received.” He said “received”, and the context was that he was talking about the law officers. The First Minister has not cleared up the matter. I urge him to come forward and clarify exactly what he said, because he has not done so, so far.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00890)

Good. Last week, I was pleased that the Deputy First Minister committed to do more for vulnerable young children. She talked positively, I have to say, about building a consensus. I was therefore disappointed to see, the very next day, a statement from the Government that it would not even be piloting an extension of free early learning for deprived two-year-olds. I need the First Minister to clear this matter up. It is important, because Nobel laureate Professor James Heckman has worked out that the highest rate of return in education comes from investment before a child is three. He is one of many experts who support that view. Will the First Minister clear the matter up and commit to following the United Kingdom Government by extending early education to 40 per cent of two-year-olds—the ones who need it most—rather than sticking to the 1 per cent who are in his current plans?

I accept that the work in relation to three and four-year-olds and the other work that the First Minister mentioned represent good progress. However, the best investment is made before a child is three. The First Minister is doing some of that, but £1 invested before a child is three can save £11 later. I want to join in the consensus. A parliamentary motion has been lodged that calls for more provision for two-year-olds; the motion has been signed by members of all five parties in the Parliament, including members of the First Minister’s party. I welcome that and I want us to work together, but we need a bit more commitment on the matter. If a two-year-old misses out now, they miss out for ever. If the First Minister will not commit to help 40 per cent of two-year-olds, as the UK Government has done, will he at least agree to open up the budget and look for a radical change, so that we can do more for young children?

It is interesting that Jamie Hepburn started his sometimes reasonable speech by saying that he welcomed the debate. No one would have thought that last week, given the hysterical reaction from the SNP benches. It was hysterical to the point of trying to shut down the debate, which is interesting because it was two reports that the SNP Government commissioned—the reports of the independent budget review and the Christie commission—that asked for a non-polarised debate and transparency, as Gavin Brown suggested, on the cost of universal benefits. The independent budget review also said that the universal benefits were commendable but may simply no longer be affordable and called for a debate. I am pleased that Jamie Hepburn now thinks that there should be a debate because I, too, think that there should be one. That does not mean that we are against universal benefits. The Liberal Democrats and our colleagues in the Labour Party, when we were in government together, delivered many universal benefits including free dental and eye checks, free personal care, free tuition—I whisper that one—and free bus passes. We delivered many universal benefits together—it was not the SNP that delivered those, although one would not think that now. We delivered those things together, and we are not against universal benefits in principle. The issue is not universalism but what wider benefit we get from the investment, which must be evidence based. For instance, we face big challenges on health—as one of the sickest nations in Europe, we need to tackle that—and on life chances and social mobility. We also face huge challenges on climate change and, with our ageing population, on demographics. Those are the principles that we should be addressing and the big goals that we should be trying to deal with. On free eye checks, for example, there was a report by the Association of Optometrists—one might say that they would say this anyway, but the report includes some excellent figures—suggesting that the cost of poor-sightedness is around £2 billion a year. Free eye checks costs around £30 million, but the return is in the order of £400 million because there are an extra 300,000 eye tests a year. That is a good thing to have. That is the wider benefit of preventive health; the principle there is about preventive health rather than universalism as the policy helps us to deal with a greater goal. On life chances, the tax thresholds that we are changing at Westminster are taking a whole load of people who are on lower incomes scales out of tax altogether. That is a good thing. It is a social good to try to improve social mobility. On nursery education for two-year-olds, we are failing miserably here in Scotland. In England, 40 per cent of two-year-olds receive nursery education support whereas in Scotland only 1 per cent do. In England, the most disadvantaged receive support, whereas only 1 per cent do so up here. I want us to do more, and I welcome Nicola Sturgeon’s remarks on that last week. Look also at the pupil premium that we are introducing down south, which is based on free school meal entitlement. A whole load of people from disadvantaged backgrounds are getting extra support, which improves their life chances. On climate change, the insulation programme applies irrespective of income. We have a big challenge on the climate, so that is where the investment should go. It is not just about universalism. In some ways, the debate, although welcome, is actually not about universalism versus not—that is what Jackie Baillie was referring to—but about what other goals we are trying to achieve. On free personal care—

I was trying to make an elevated contribution to this debate, but I struggle with interventions like that. I think that all parties are prone to use selective statistics, so we need to be careful when we accuse others of doing that.

The member makes a good contribution. I will try to make the rest of my elevated contribution within 40 seconds. The big problem that I have is with the council tax freeze. I cannot understand how the universalism in that has been dressed up as equity. “The Government Economic Strategy” mentions sustainability, cohesion and solidarity, which are great principles, but I am not sure how the council tax freeze fits with those. How can Fred Goodwin being given a discount of £3,000 be of benefit to the wider community? I have a big issue with that and I think that we need a debate about that. Universalism itself is not the principle; the big issue is what benefit we get from the investment that we make.

3. To ask the Deputy First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00872)

I thank the Deputy First Minister for her best wishes. It is good news that the Scottish Government will increase nursery education for three and four-year-olds, but Save the Children tells us that, before the age of three, the children from disadvantaged backgrounds have already fallen behind. If we are to give them a chance, we need to increase provision for those two-year-olds. Will the Deputy First Minister’s plans to give nursery education to only 1 per cent of two-year-olds be good enough to bridge the gap in educational attainment between the rich and the poor?

Bob Doris and Sandra White knew all that the Deputy First Minister has set out, but they have demanded—in a motion and through speeches here—that more is done. In England, free nursery education will be given to 40 per cent—four out of 10—two-year-olds. In Scotland, the equivalent figure is only 1 per cent. A generation will miss out and the evidence is that many will never, ever catch up. That is a gap in provision that will lock in a gap in attainment. I appeal to the Deputy First Minister once more to review the Government’s plans so that disadvantaged kids do not lose out.

I thank the finance secretary for the advance copy of his statement and for the offer of talks yesterday. He knows that, last year, the Liberal Democrats worked constructively to deliver changes to the budget and that we secured extra funds for colleges, social housing and early intervention. I hope that we can work together again this year to protect those gains. As Gavin Brown said, the budget is £34 billion. It has increased in cash terms, no matter what the finance secretary says about DEL budgets. Mr Swinney said this morning that he wanted a “relentless pursuit of economic growth”, but the budget is a timid one, which has been proposed by a Government that is focused more on independence than on economic growth. If he was really committed to doing all that he can, he would make the necessary reforms to release £1.5 billion that is locked-up in the accounts of Scottish Water to invest in creating 100,000 new jobs in broadband, science, early intervention and energy efficiency. That is the kind of change that prioritises the economy. Will he make those reforms to release the money to create the jobs, or will he just be timid?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00839)

No matter what the First Minister says about Europe, there is a great deal of confusion about his plans for Scotland in the European Union. Asserting something does not make it true. The First Minister says that he is right and that Scotland will continue to be a member of the EU, but what if he is wrong?

There is clearly a dispute about that legal advice and, if voters opt for independence, they may well find out that we have lost the rebate and that we will be forced to join the euro and the Schengen agreement. That is the reality. That is the consequence if the First Minister is wrong. When will he get clarity on the issue? When will he start negotiations and discussions with other EU members about the way ahead? We need clarity. We cannot just take a step in the dark, based on his assertions.

The difficulty with the finance minister’s position is that he is committed to borrowing even more. Is he concerned about the AAA credit rating? Does he accept that endlessly borrowing more money has an impact on that?

The finance minister will have read the IMF report from earlier this year, which talked about shifting spending, not borrowing more. Has the finance minister not considered that?

It was reported this morning that John Swinney is “actively exploring” what the Government could do to create jobs and grow the construction sector. That is just what I wanted to hear. If he is in the mood for actively exploring, I make a suggestion. He knows what I am going to say—it is about Scottish Water. He knows the scheme, and I am sure that he has read the manifesto and refreshes it on a regular basis. He and the First Minister have previously hinted to the media that he will reform Scottish Water but only after independence. Why do we have to wait? He says that the situation is urgent now—that is what he devoted most of his speech to—so why not act now? Why not take the opportunity?

If Jamie Hepburn checks the record, he will find that the proposal was received with a great amount of warmth at Westminster. Danny Alexander is on the record about it, and we are confident. If the cabinet secretary wants some assistance with the liaison with Westminster, I am sure that we can provide it. We are talking about a £1.5 billion windfall that we understand would be forthcoming. We would not say that if we were not confident. We believe that it can be secured if the cabinet secretary takes the opportunity. We are talking about business loans, energy efficiency schemes and superfast broadband, which is included in his strategy document. Science and technology research are likewise included, as is the early intervention programme. I am sure that the Government could support all those measures, so why will it not take the opportunity with Scottish Water? The First Minister has said that, if Scottish Water were given the same status as Network Rail, it “could borrow easily in the markets”.—[Official Report, 4 September 2012; c 10920.] If that happened, we could avoid investing £140 million in Scottish Water, which we are doing this year. I do not know whether the cabinet secretary wants to take the opportunity to tell me whether he has changed his mind on Scottish Water and whether he will start discussions with Westminster about releasing money from Scottish Water. I will allow him to intervene if he wants to take that opportunity. If he is serious about boosting the economy, it is something that he can do—it is within his gift. Does the cabinet secretary want to intervene?

There is nothing new—that is the problem. The power is in the cabinet secretary’s hands and he could take the proposal forward. It is a question of sustainable finances and trying to live within our means. Let us look at what is happening in the world. The UK, Europe and the west are experiencing a massive body blow—a huge shock—after years of overspending and living beyond our means in an unsustainable manner. We are now paying the price and are having to readjust.

I am speaking much more broadly than that. I am saying that in the whole of society—the whole of the west—we have been living far beyond our means. One could limit that to Governments and say that they have lived beyond their means, but the level of consumer debt back in the 2000s and 1990s was far out of control and very little was done to bring it back under control. That is why we are struggling now. We face a massive challenge in having to readjust and try to live within our means.

The minister will know that it is illegal for the Scottish Government to go over its budget, so it is not about that. I am making a broader point: as a society we are living beyond our means, and Governments have done so too. Throughout Europe and in the United States, we have been spending far beyond what we could afford. That is why I was disappointed with the finance secretary’s response earlier. He highlighted that borrowing has gone up at a UK level, but his solution was to borrow even more, and that is the problem. If we borrow more, our credit rating could be under threat, which drives up the cost of borrowing and threatens how we sustain ourselves. As well as that big body blow, we are facing a massive economic shift of wealth from the west to China, India, Brazil and Russia. There are two body blows at the same time: the draining away of economic might and wealth to those other countries, and the fact that we are having to readjust to live within our means.

I am taking too many. We are also under threat from not living within our means in relation to the environment. There is a huge challenge not only from climate change but in our energy resources and our capacity to live within mother nature’s limits. That is why I support the Scottish Government’s ambitions on renewable energy and on the low-carbon economy. They are the right things to do. There are some big challenges around landscape protection and the subsidy that is required to advance the energy changes, but those things are important. If we do not meet those challenges now, we are storing up future problems. I also agree with the Government’s strategy on equity. Preventative spending and the change funds are the right approach to trying to ensure that the whole country benefits from economic growth and the wealth of the nation. All those challenges that we face at the same time are not simply about narrow party politics in the chamber. They are massive challenges, and we in the Scottish Parliament must rise to meet them. It is disappointing, and a major flaw, that the Government economic strategy ignores completely some major policy areas that the UK Government is advancing and that it creates the impression that only the Scottish Government is acting. The UK youth contract, the loan guarantee schemes that are trying to get money into businesses and the green investment bank are having a big impact in Scotland. In addition, the strategy document makes no reference at all to much smaller UK schemes such as the enterprise zones in Nigg, Dundee and Irvine. If we are going to make the best of the United Kingdom as a whole—we are still in the UK, whether the SNP likes it or not—we need to work as a partnership, and the document lets us down in that respect. I move amendment S4M-04045.3 to leave out from “supports” to end and insert “calls on the Scottish Government to work closely with the UK Government to support economic and employment growth; supports efforts through the Youth Contract to support young people into employment and calls for more active support for this initiative from Scottish ministers; notes that the Scottish Government has only recently established a working group to advise on macroeconomic rules and fiscal responsibility and that this is not due to report until 2013; believes nonetheless that there is a need for fiscal responsibility in advance of that advice; calls on the Scottish Government to use the public resources and assets at its disposal to maximise economic impact, not least in terms of Scottish Water, which continues to receive large annual loans from the Scottish Government even though the First Minister made a speech in the spring of 2012 that appeared to back calls from the Scottish Liberal Democrats, and his own Independent Budget Review, for Scottish Water to access readily available loans from others and for the Scottish Government to use the saved resources for other important projects; believes that reform of Scottish Water into a public benefit corporation, within the public sector, has the potential to free windfall resources that can transform the Scottish economy and help the creation of tens of thousands of jobs through investment in science, energy efficiency, super-fast broadband, early intervention and support for small business, and believes that this should form part of the forthcoming budget and legislative programme.”

Does the member think that the International Monetary Fund is economically illiterate? It does not recommend that we should borrow more, as the member states.

Will the member give way?

If there is space around the Sillars-MacDonald dinner table this evening, I would like to join them.

The debate has been surprisingly enlightening, and there have been some excellent contributions. Linda Fabiani spoke about procurement, micro-businesses, economic development tools and her review of the PQQ, and the impression that I got is that she is not satisfied with the proposals that have been made so far. Certainly, when I talk to businesses in Mid Scotland and Fife, I hear that they are concerned about the procurement process. I commend Linda Fabiani for her contribution.

That is right. Good practice should be required on the part of all those who benefit from public procurement, but we have to be careful about the constraints that we put on the process. People who are contributing to the debate, including environmentalists and scientists, want things such as innovation, the living wage and good practice of the sort that Dr Simpson outlined. Those are all important things, but if we overburden the process, there is a danger that we will just ratchet up prices. We need to ensure that the constraints that we put into the process are realistic, because otherwise we will not meet our ambitions. That is not to say that what the member said is not right. It is right, but we need to be careful about the burdens that we put into the process. We need to be realistic so that we can create a sustainable procurement process. Margaret McCulloch is one of the few members who looked beyond the boundaries of the United Kingdom, or indeed Scotland. She gave an analysis of the development of Russia, Brazil and China, and she was right to raise the issues she did. John Park spoke about employment rights and the need to ensure that the Scottish Government is making the case to the UK Government on those issues. John Mason made some important points on population issues, although if he was suggesting a different immigration policy for Scotland if it was to become independent, we would need to be careful about the consequences for our relationship with the rest of the UK. Hanzala Malik spoke about empty properties, and he was quite right to raise those issues, which affect not just big businesses but small businesses. Although I disagree with some of Rob Gibson’s criticisms of the Green Investment Bank, he raised some legitimate issues about defence that we need to work on with the MOD. Several members made significant contributions to the debate, but others were more disappointing. Mark McDonald criticised others for not coming forward with any other positive suggestions and he implied that the limitations of the current constitutional settlement are preventing the Scottish Government from achieving more. However, I did make a suggestion about Scottish Water. He might not like it, but I did suggest the option and he could adopt it.

Not just now. John Swinney has decided to phase use of the fossil fuel levy money over a number of years. He could bring that forward and use it now—that is an option—just as he has recommended that the UK Government should do the same. If he had not abandoned the powers to vary income tax, he could do that as well. There are a number of powers that the Government could use if it wanted to, but it prefers to blame Westminster rather than coming up with solutions itself.

No, it is the opposite. SNP members present themselves as being in a straitjacket and having no ability to change policy, but they do have that ability. I have mentioned three things that the Government could do. I am not saying that I support them, but the Government could do those things if it wished to do them. To say that it is constrained is not accurate.

Not just now. I am afraid that Stuart McMillan fell into the same trap. He implied that the Bank of England would have no control over how much Scotland would spend, but John Swinney has already admitted that there would at least be a dialogue. I presume that if there would be a dialogue, that implies that there would be some power with the Bank of England, so there is a recognition that the Bank of England would have some control. Then we heard from the group that are adamant that we could borrow more irrespective of the consequences—irrespective of what the IMF says and irrespective of what it would do to our AAA credit rating.

Not just now.

I remind members that the AAA credit rating secures our low borrowing costs. That allows the Scottish Government to borrow what it can borrow at present. It is a shame that those members choose to ignore that. Living in a world in which there are no consequences for actions is a pretty narrow position to be in. As Chic Brodie would describe it, it is a black picture. It is he who was painting the black picture. It is important to take a broader view of the issues of sustainability, because that is what the debate is about. It is about looking at sustainability, the environment, climate change, energy, the finances and the economy. If we do not do that, the debate is very limited.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00823)

We have just heard from Johann Lamont that the health service and the economy are being deprioritised by the First Minister as he moves his most senior minister from health to independence. There is also a concern about the cost of focusing the civil service on making the Scottish National Party’s case for independence. How many civil servants are working for the new minister for independence and how much is it costing?

The First Minister loves to bluster rather than answer the question. It is surprising that he does not even know how many civil servants are working on that, and how much it is costing. This summer, we learned that every civil servant had received training—not on boosting the economy or improving public services, but on how to keep information on independence secret and how to criticise the United Kingdom. [Laughter.] SNP members laugh and joke, but that is what is happening. The First Minister’s deputy is paid by the taxpayer to run the SNP’s independence campaign. With all the problems that are facing our country, can it really be justified for taxpayers to pay her and for so many civil servants to be devoted to the SNP’s cause? Come on—tell us.

I, too, pay tribute to Bruce Crawford. He serves in the same region as me and he has always been a courteous and diligent colleague. He skilfully steered his party through the minefields of minority government. I pay a heartfelt tribute to him for his work and his considerable commitment, for which we should all be grateful. In a former life, Brian Adam greatly assisted me when I worked in science. He has always been dedicated and has put aside party politics to deal with the greater cause. I pay tribute to him, too. I assume that Stewart Stevenson can now devote his full attention to his inspiring and sometimes flamboyant approval—at least, I think that it is approval—of my questioning of the First Minister every week. Stewart Stevenson is never quiet during that and I am never quite sure whether he approves of what I say. At First Minister’s question time, we discussed the change of balance in the Government. We have registered our concern that the most senior minister has been diverted to lead the referendum campaign. It is not just me who is concerned. Earlier today, the First Minister hinted that he wanted ministers to serve five-year terms, as Nye Bevan did. In half a sentence, he wiped out the promotion prospects for a generation of SNP back benchers—they are looking worried now. I therefore particularly welcome those who could be the last new SNP ministers we ever see: Humza Yousaf, Margaret Burgess, Paul Wheelhouse and Joe FitzPatrick. I pay tribute to the new ministers and to those who are retiring. We all know that politics is not an easy life. We are not universally loved by our voters. Working in government is a challenging task when pushing through difficult things. The commitment that that takes and the impact on our families and friends are not small. I pay tribute to everybody who commits their life to politics and to the ministers, who will have late nights and extra work. I genuinely thank them for that effort. We wish them well and hope that they will make a positive impact for the wider interests of the people of Scotland.

Thank you to all the members who have expressed their condolences to Astrid Gorrie following the sad death of her husband Donald. Donald was proud to be a member of this Parliament, not for the position itself, but for what he could do—what he could change while he was here. He was a model for all parliamentarians present and future, and we are all sad at his passing. [Applause.] I am sure that Donald would have been a supporter of the Government’s proposed equal marriage legislation. In fact, in 2004, he said, in typical Donald fashion: “I thought that the system in this country was that the church did its thing and the state did its thing. It is quite wrong for the state to tell the church what it may or may not do. We should not impose anything on it, nor should we prevent things from happening using blanket provisions.”—[Official Report, 3 June 2004; c 8936.] Donald was absolutely spot on. The Government’s bill will bring freedom to churches to manage their own affairs rather than their being instructed by Government about what they can and cannot do. Many want to conduct same-sex marriages, and no Government minister should prevent them from doing so. Equal marriage will be a mark of a modern, fair and equal society and I applaud Nicola Sturgeon for leading the effort. It will not be easy, but I applaud her for her courage. With scares about brothers marrying, premature death, job losses and—the latest—polygamy, the more that those who are opposed to equal marriage protest, the stronger the case becomes. For almost 80 years—SNP members will not like this bit—the SNP has protested about oppression by the British state. It has marched, advocated, shouted and argued that Scots should be free from the dead hand of Westminster. However, now in power, the SNP, instead of delivering that change, says that it needs a little bit longer to sort out the paperwork. Sixteen months after the SNP won the mandate to hold the referendum, there has been little progress. There has been no publication of the responses to the consultation, there is no date for negotiations between the Scottish secretary and the First Minister and there is not even a date for the referendum. The SNP spends more time arguing for a second question that it does not support than it does arguing for the independence that it apparently does support—and now it is redefining independence at a ferocious rate to include more and more of the British state that it had previously demonised. One gets the distinct impression that the SNP now fears its own policy.

That was a valiant attempt, but as soon as Martin Sime starts living within SCVO policy, I will no longer criticise him. Mr Sime should understand that the SCVO does not support a second question; he knows that and the First Minister should not misrepresent it. We will support the victims bill, which will assist victims in recovering from crime and give them a greater role in the justice system.

I am sure that the First Minister has read Alison Elliot’s speech from earlier this year, in which she said: “For the avoidance of doubt, we are not launching a campaign for a particular outcome in the referendum. We are not launching a campaign to get a second question on the ballot paper.” The First Minister might not like to hear that but perhaps, having done so, he will no longer argue that SCVO is arguing for a second question—it certainly is not. The procurement bill must turn the procurement budget into an economic development tool, especially for local and small businesses rather than the big businesses favoured by the current system. If the Scottish Government reverses the trend towards bundling contracts into supercontracts, it will have our support. Although the children and young people bill will eventually bring Scottish nursery entitlement up to the level that the coalition in England is delivering for three and four-year-olds, it will not do the same for the many more disadvantaged two-year-olds. At a UK level, we have delivered for 40 per cent of the most disadvantaged two-year-olds, who are going to get a great entitlement to nursery education, and I hope that the First Minister will increase his entitlement for those in Scotland. The big missed opportunity, however, is Scottish Water. By changing it to a public benefit corporation that would be firmly in the public sector, we could release a potential windfall of £1.5 billion, which could be used now for business growth, energy efficiency, superfast broadband, support for research into science and technology and early intervention. Given that the First Minister has said before that Scottish Water could borrow easily in the markets if it was placed on the same status as Network Rail, I find it incredible that he is spending another £140 million on it that could be invested in his so-called shovel-ready projects. We can all think of the shovel-ready projects that could receive investment if he was bold enough to make that change but, as always—

Certainly, Presiding Officer. Given the choice, the SNP prefers to complain rather than act. It has ducked away from this single most effective decision for jobs and the economy.

I find what has been said rather strange, as we have delivered the Scotland Act 2012 and quite substantial powers, and we have a commission under the chairmanship of Sir Ming Campbell that is moving forward to the next stage of home rule. I am not sure how that comes to abandoning our long-term commitment. Will the member explain that?

Will the member give way?

We welcome the bill. The Parliament is taking a sensible approach in seeking to adapt the welfare reforms to Scottish circumstances so that they can be made more appropriate to local situations. This debate is not easy for the Liberal Democrats. The welfare reform changes are substantial, and there is no doubt that some people will lose out. I disagree with Alex Johnstone’s view that there will not be people who will lose out from the changes, because there will. Our job in government at a UK level is to ensure that the changes are introduced in a sensitive way and that we can adapt them to circumstances as those become clearer over time—

Not just now. In that way, we can ensure that the vulnerable do not suffer. However, reform is an overriding necessity. If the welfare budget continues to grow as it is doing, it will be £192 billion by 2015 . No society, even one as wealthy as the United Kingdom, can afford such a welfare bill. In recent years, even with the growth in the economy, the welfare budget has gone up by 40 per cent. We now have 5 million people who are trapped on out-of-work benefits. I say “trapped”, as I have met many of those people in my advice surgeries—

Not just now. Those people tell me that they are not going to take certain jobs because they do not know whether they will be able to keep them, and they are not confident that they would get their benefits back in time. In many cases, they would face a five-week wait before they could get their benefits back on stream. They tell me that they will not take those jobs. I am not saying that the same is true of everyone, but there are some people who are trapped by the benefits system. We need to make the necessary changes so that those people have an escape from benefits. People who deny that that is the case have not studied the issue.

Not just now. I have a huge amount of respect for Margaret Burgess, because she has seen many of these issues close at hand through her work with citizens advice bureaux. I fully respect what she says, but it is an exaggeration to claim that we are wrecking the welfare state. We will continue to spend billions of pounds on the welfare state. It will be a genuine safety net, and it will make work pay.

Not just now. The new system will make things simpler. The universal credit is a sensible way to proceed. It will involve one source of payment and receipt, and a tapering system that will ensure that people do not lose all their benefits at the same time. As people go into work, a taper will apply. Those are sensible changes that everyone should welcome. We should not try to scare people into believing that everyone will lose out, because that is not the case. Some people will benefit. About 230,000 people will be about £30 a week up. Those who do not believe me need to check out the facts. More childcare support—£300 million-worth of it—will be available. Those are good changes. It is uncomfortable for us to make changes to a budget of such a size. That will be difficult, but the Liberal Democrats in the coalition ensure that the changes that are made are as fair as we can make them. Members: Oh! Those members who groan have not looked at the facts. Substantial changes have been made to the work capability test.

I do not have much time left. Changes have been made on the waiting time for the personal independence payment and the mobility element of disability living allowance for those in residential care. The new system is not about punishing people who are on benefits—that is not our motivation. It is about enabling them to get back into work. Those who say that there is an alternative to reform are letting people down. We need to create a welfare system that enables rather than one that punishes.

I thank the cabinet secretary for early sight of his statement and welcome the reallocations to social housing. Does the cabinet secretary think that they will be enough to meet the Scottish National Party’s manifesto commitment on social rented housing? Also, does he plan to make a statement on the extra capital—the extra borrowing—that will be available through the Scotland Act 2012? We have heard about the acceleration of the A9 project. What else will benefit?

The cabinet secretary has rightly commended those organisations for their contributions to the bill process. Why did he ignore their opposition to the bill?

3. To ask the Deputy First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00780)

In response to Jenny Marra, the Deputy First Minister talked about human rights in China. Let us remind ourselves that China is a country where 500,000 people have been detained without trial, where women are forced to have abortions on the orders of the Government and where political oppression is at its most severe in Tibet. The Deputy First Minister has a chance today to be very clear about what she thinks. Will she, on behalf of the Scottish Government, condemn the Chinese Government’s human rights record?

I am pleased to hear the Deputy First Minister condemning the Chinese Government’s human rights record—I have to say that it is a welcome change from the First Minister’s ambiguous attitude. Will the Deputy First Minister now take some practical steps? We know that the consul general has put pressure on Scottish councils and the First Minister; Dundee has pulled back from the Dalai Lama’s visit and the First Minister is refusing to meet him. To put things right, the Deputy First Minister can do two things: first, encourage her colleagues on Dundee City Council to provide a high-level speaker to deputise for the lord provost; and secondly, get the First Minister or any other minister at any point over the next three days to meet the Dalai Lama. If the Deputy First Minister takes those steps today, she will send a loud and clear message to the Chinese Government that she condemns its human rights record. Will she make those changes happen?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00752)

Earlier this week, I received a letter from a former senior official of Scottish Enterprise, who was angry at the appointment of the chief executive of Scottish Enterprise to the board of Intertek for an annual payment of £55,000 on top of her £200,000 salary. What does the First Minister have to say to that former Scottish Enterprise official?

Two years ago, the First Minister told the chamber that John Swinney had already acted to heavily restrict bonuses in the public sector; only now we find that there is a loophole allowing access to an extra £55,000. Most people—perhaps not those on the Scottish National Party benches—would not accept that £55,000 for 12 days’ work can be justified for someone who is already being paid £200,000 every year. [Laughter.] SNP members might laugh, but most people will find their laughter hollow. I cannot really believe that the First Minister supports this appointment. If he reverses this decision today, he will get my support. Will he act?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. At First Minister’s question time today, the First Minister said: “Under contracts that were drawn up during the years of the Labour and Liberal Administration, Lena Wilson has a contractual entitlement to a public sector bonus”. That simply cannot be true. The chief executive was appointed in 2009, her contract was drawn up in 2009 and her bonus was agreed in 2009. It is a chronological impossibility that any previous Government is responsible for Lena Wilson’s bonus. Presiding Officer, will you give the First Minister, who is sitting in the chamber, an opportunity to correct the record and accept that the contract was drawn up under his Administration?

I thank the cabinet secretary for an advance copy of the statement and the consultation document. He talks radically about the powers that he wants, but he is cautious and timid about the powers that he has just received. Instead of a grand new vision on energy efficiency, developing brownfield land, or high street regeneration, what seems to have got Mr Swinney out of his bed this morning was the prospect of setting up a new and additional tax office quango. Of the 35 existing reliefs and exemptions, why is he proposing to make changes to only four of them?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00719)

This week, the First Minister’s bulldozer came charging back out of the garage. This time, it was the Justice Committee ramming through police centralisation and crushing amendment after amendment. What is next in the bulldozer’s path? Perhaps it will be emergency control rooms. Can the First Minister guarantee that he will not close local police and fire emergency control rooms?

So I get no answer—absolutely no answer. The First Minister stood there before, boasting about the big numbers that his centralisation plans will save. We should not forget that, in his own consultation, his plans were rejected by two to one. He should not give me any of that tosh about the public supporting his plans for centralisation. The truth is that his changes will cost money, not save it, which is why the control rooms are under threat. People at the Scottish Police Federation think that emergency control rooms will close. Only a couple of weeks ago, a chief fire officer told Radio Scotland that he believed that closures were on the way. When will the decision be made? People rely on control rooms at Thornton, Dundee, Inverness, Aberdeen, Govan and many more places. When will they be told their fate?

If the First Minister is giving the Parliament a choice and a decision today, why does he not trust the people of Scotland with a decision today?

Drew Smith made a very valid point. Those on the SNP benches who condemn people who have a different point of view should be a bit more temperate in their language. I have never said and have never believed that Scotland is too poor and too stupid. I have never held that view. I have always believed in devolving more power to Scotland. I have campaigned for that for my whole life. Inherent in that position is a belief in Scotland’s abilities to do much more. However, that does not mean that I want to be separate. The SNP often says that it is normal to be a small country, which I do not deny. Denmark, Norway, Ireland and many other countries are small. However, it is not normal to break up a modern successful country in order to be small. [Interruption.] I hear muttering from SNP members. We are going through tough times now, but to say that the United Kingdom is not a modern successful country is to decry what we have achieved together as the United Kingdom.

Mark McDonald misses the point in the language that he uses. I believe in sharing, partnership and working together when that is appropriate. I will describe later some of the things that we have done well together as the United Kingdom. We should devolve more of the domestic agenda and we should have much more control over our finances, so that we can do things here and we are not limited by other people’s priorities. That does not mean that I want everything here but, just because I do not want everything here, that does not mean that I do not trust Scots to make decisions. The SNP completely misunderstands that fundamental point. Kenneth Gibson said that we have compared Scotland to Bangladesh and other countries. The problem is that no modern successful country wants to break itself up. The reality is that all the countries that have broken themselves up after the second world war have been involved in communism or war. Of course, I am not saying that Scotland is a war-torn country; I am saying that it is the exact opposite. Because we are modern and successful, we should not break up the United Kingdom. The countries that broke up had nothing left before they broke up. That was why it was easy for them to break up.

I will not just now. The United Kingdom has 15,000 treaties with other countries. We have global regulations and we are a complex organisation that is connected with the rest of the world. Breaking that up would be difficult, which is why nobody else has done that. No other modern successful country has broken up.

No. Another key argument of the SNP is about control and the belief that, just by taking all the decisions ourselves, we would somehow have control. That ignores the fact that we have global markets and that we rely on co-operation and partnership. We want to influence other people, which is why we pool sovereignty.

I will not just now. We want to influence other people, which is why we come together to make the better world that we all want. Just doing things ourselves will not suddenly make things better. England will not suddenly disappear if Scotland goes independent—England will still be there and will still be a force. As long as that is the case, I want to influence our neighbours and work together in partnership. I will look at some of the things that we have achieved together. We have one of the biggest international development budgets that the United Kingdom has ever had. It is a force for good throughout the world and we are respected throughout the world for what we achieve in international development. I do not want to lose influence over that budget. Despite the Iraq war—

No. I agree with Humza Yousaf about the Iraq war—it was the wrong decision and it was illegal. However, I reach a different conclusion from him. I want to influence what is one of the strongest defence forces in the world and one of the biggest defence forces in Europe. In foreign affairs, we have embassies throughout the world that have a big impact on the rest of the world. Let us maintain our influence on them. Of course, we do not get it all our own way—I understand that—but it is much better to be involved, to be in partnership, to work together and to influence what our neighbours are doing. What is great about the United Kingdom is that we take the rough with the smooth and we work together in partnership. For us, home rule is about devolving much more power to the Scottish Parliament. We have a strong record that we have built over a long period.

We worked together with the Labour Party to deliver the Scottish Parliament, the Scotland Act 1998 and many more powers. With that, we get the best of both worlds: we can work in partnership and have more control while maintaining our influence.

That is the best of the United Kingdom and that is what we should maintain.

I thank the First Minister for the gifts that he has chosen, which I think will gain widespread approval across Scotland. They are appropriate for the occasion, and I thank the First Minister for choosing well. The Queen did not choose this life. Neither she, nor her father before her, expected to fulfil the role of monarch. It is against that backdrop that we judge and admire Her Majesty’s commitment to public service. I enjoy going to events such as the Fife show or to places such as Carnegie College. I enjoy meeting people on such occasions, but I think that I would find it hard if I faced doing that almost every day for the next 42 years, as I would have to do to match the Queen’s diary. If I particularly enjoyed a visit, I would not be able to extend it to find out a bit more about what went on behind the scenes, as I can do as a private citizen. If I did not like something, I would not be able just to nip off early and go to something else or go for a cup of tea. I would have to stay, do my duty and do the right thing, as the Queen has done for the length of her service. She has committed so much in personal duty and service. My point is that although, from the outside, her life might look fantastic with all the palaces and the jewels, she took the role on at the age of 26 and could have given it up when she was 60, 70 or 80 but did not. She has chosen to carry on and to continue her service, despite the evident downsides. In 1974, her daughter was almost kidnapped. The security threats are real; she has faced intruders in her home. Even today, after 60 years, the Queen brings more to public life than people ever expect. When we leave the Parliament late in the evening, we see people from all backgrounds leaving the Palace of Holyroodhouse after enjoying a reception in the palace or its gardens. It is clear that her hospitality goes way beyond what people expect. Across the country, when the Queen goes on visits, she brings joy to people’s faces and manages to create excitement and a real sense of celebrity. We should never ignore and should always admire that. We should also remember how well judged her attendances at the Scottish Parliament always are. She displays poise and her speeches are always of the best class. The Queen always delivers much more than people expect. Therefore, after 60 years, on her diamond jubilee, it is right that Parliament takes time to mark and appreciate the service of Her Majesty.

Will the cabinet secretary take an intervention?

Mr Swinney mentions capital investment, but the recent International Monetary Fund report on the UK economy talked about any changes being revenue neutral. It suggested “property tax reform, restraint of public employee compensation growth and ... targeting of transfers to those in need.” In other words, that means cutting public sector pay and looking at current compensation measures. Does Mr Swinney support that revenue-neutral approach or does he want more borrowing?

Will the member give way?

Christine McKelvie referred to the IMF, but she will have noticed in Christine Lagarde’s statement that she referred to budget-neutral reallocations and talked about property tax reform and restraint in public employee compensation growth—that is, wages. Commentators are saying that there should perhaps be cuts to winter fuel payments, child benefit and public sector wages as a revenue-neutral measure to invest in capital infrastructure. Is that what the member supports?

I was quite looking forward to Rob Gibson’s speech. He promised much, but I do not know whether he has seen the 10-year bond rates. The current yield for the United Kingdom is 1.78 per cent, while for Greece it is 29.39 per cent. There is a world of difference between the economies of Britain and Greece, and Rob Gibson should perhaps look a wee bit more at the evidence before he talks about a run on the pound. He talks about banking reform, but we are bringing forward a significant package of reforms that will deal with the many issues to which he referred. I will begin on a point of consensus. While I was listening to John Swinney’s speech, I thought, “Where am I going to disagree with this? There must be something somewhere with which I can disagree”. He had got through much of his speech, in which he offered his analysis of the euro zone crisis and outlined many of the solutions—which I will come to—and there was common agreement. However, the difficulties arose when he leaped on some of the solutions, to which I will return. I am sure that John Swinney will be pleased to hear that I agreed with much of his speech. We should not forget that, contrary to what Neil Findlay says, there are benefits from the European Union. It is difficult to see that under the current circumstances, but there is no doubt that there are significant benefits, and John Swinney mentioned many of them. One benefit is the single market: 40 per cent of the UK’s exports—and 45 per cent of Scottish exports, as John Swinney said—go to the European Union, and there are 3.5 million more jobs because of the single market. Costs have been cut as a result—

In a second. The cost of living has been cut by £480 per person per year as a result of the single market. That is the effect and the benefit of the EU for individual citizens.

I do not know whether Neil Findlay has listened to many of Ian Davidson’s speeches, but I suspect that he is on the Ian Davidson wing of the Labour Party. He should perhaps be a bit more careful in contributing to these debates, because that is a dangerous place to be. I will talk about the steps that must be taken in the euro zone. We have talked about the need to have the appropriate firewall—€700 billion is clearly insufficient; we need a bigger firewall than that. The United Kingdom is right to continue to press the euro zone countries to increase the size of that firewall. We have talked about the euro bonds, which are a step in the right direction, but we need to be careful that other members on the periphery of the euro zone do not think that euro bonds will somehow solve all their problems. They need some fiscal discipline. If Germany is to agree in effect to compensate on a permanent basis, through our euro zone, other countries that are not conforming to that fiscal rigour, those countries must recognise that they have some kind of responsibility. Sharing that risk across the euro zone will be important.

Go on then.

Perhaps Margo MacDonald can elaborate on her earlier comments. I am afraid that I do not have a hotline to the German politicians, so I am not quite sure what commitments they will give for the future. However, I think that Germany knows that having a stable euro zone is in its interest. Germany is talking about addressing the relative productivity and competitiveness across the euro zone, and even about increasing wages in Germany to ensure that the issue of relative competitiveness is addressed so that there is not such a stark contrast—

I am taking an awful lot of interventions; I will probably not get through my speech, Chic. Neil Findlay talked about the contrast between countries in the euro zone and the tensions that that creates. Germany understands that and is trying to address it, but that will not just involve Greece fulfilling its part of the bargain—Germany has to change as well. At the core of all that is the need for fiscal discipline. Countries must recognise that they need to live within their means. If they do not do so, the 10-year bond rates will just shoot up and that will have a direct impact on everybody’s livelihood: interest rates will shoot up, affecting mortgage rates, and everybody will have to pay for it. It is not as if there is free money out there that we can get access to. The reality is that we must live within our means and we must have a stable euro zone. When people cite the IMF, they miss the fact that it talks about investment in capital infrastructure being budget neutral—in other words, it involves reallocations. Some of the medicine that the IMF is proposing to pay for that is quite stark. Christine Lagarde is talking about proposals—which I do not favour—such as cuts in winter fuel payments, child benefit and public sector pay. The action that is proposed is, we are told, budget neutral; it will not be funded through borrowing. Christine Lagarde talks about borrowing in other areas, but when it comes to capital expenditure, she says that it is budget neutral. People who claim that we need to increase capital spend need to take that into account. We should not forget that the decisions that the present UK Government took in its early days in office have been proved to be right. Christine Lagarde has said: “Sometimes you feel like you could look back and wonder ‘what if?’ And when I think back myself to May 2010, when the UK deficit was at 11%, and I try to imagine what the situation would be like today if no such fiscal consolidation programme had been decided ... I shiver.” We should all shiver and be glad that we did not pay attention to the SNP and Labour.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00697)

The First Minister will have seen the open letter from 40 leading figures that calls for a Scottish public inquiry into the Lockerbie prosecution. The group made it clear that it wants a Scottish inquiry, whether or not there is an appeal. The Scottish Government’s Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission identified six grounds for appeal, including the conduct of the Crown Office, withheld evidence and doubt about identification. The First Minister has said that he would be prepared to co-operate with a United Kingdom inquiry. If he has no objection in principle to an inquiry, will he agree to hold the Scottish inquiry that the group wants?

This is not just about guilt or innocence; it is also about the conduct of the Crown Office. Surely, a liberal society should be prepared to look hard at its justice system, even if it is worried about what it might find. Whether or not that is determined surely cannot be left in the hands of a family somewhere in Tripoli. If the First Minister chose to act on the inquiry, he would have the support of Desmond Tutu, Terry Waite, John Pilger and many others. This is not a normal case; it is Scotland’s biggest terrorist atrocity. These are serious questions that have been raised by serious people, and the world is watching. Will the First Minister act?

I have sympathy for what Richard Simpson is trying to do. I can understand the concern that, by the end of this process, all that we will do is increase supermarkets’ profits. However, as other members have done, I point to the practicalities of the scheme in his amendment, which would be enormously expensive to implement and difficult to calculate, so we will not support it. The intention behind the amendment is right. The House of Commons Health Committee identified that we should proceed by using a combination of price and duty to deal with the issue of consumption that leads to harm. Now that the UK Government is considering minimum pricing, perhaps it will consider going with that combination of duty and minimum price. That would help us to achieve the ambitions that Richard Simpson has set out. In the meantime, we cannot just wait for that to happen; we have to get on with it. We have been debating the issue for a number of years. I do not want to wait for something perfect to come along before proceeding with the bill, and I am disappointed that Richard Simpson has taken that view today. We need to reflect on the fact that it will not just be the supermarkets and off-licences that will benefit from the measure. There is a whole supply chain—a whole industry—that could benefit from increased profits. There is a difference between revenue and profit. We might end up with the more expensive brands having narrower margins for the supermarkets, so there might be a proportional increase in profit. As I said, we cannot support the amendment. On Jackson Carlaw’s point, I note that the bill’s intention is to suppress consumption, and if consumption is suppressed, we suppress revenue and profit. Let us make the policy a success.

I thank Nicola Sturgeon for pioneering the bill. It is pioneering legislation and she is out there in front, proposing a measure that a lot of people will not like. We talk about the bill in Parliament as if it will be immensely popular. However, if it is going to be effective, a lot of people will not like it. Introducing such legislation takes a certain amount of courage, so I thank Nicola Sturgeon for the effort that she has put in over a number of years, despite opposition from my party, from the Conservatives and from Labour. I have always believed in minimum pricing. I had to be relatively quiet about that in the past, but I have always been supportive of it—I always was at Westminster. The party in Scotland was finely balanced—it was not absolutely against minimum pricing, but the decision that the party came to was that it did not support it. I had to charm party members and I had to work on them when I became leader. Fortunately, they agreed with me and they now support the bill. I am pleased that we have put our differences with the SNP aside and are now working for the bill. For me, the evidence is quite clear. The important connections, as referred to by Kenneth Gibson, are the connection between price and consumption, and between consumption and harm. If we look back 30 years, drink is more affordable now by between 45 per cent and 70 per cent. Price has gone up by 22 per cent, but incomes have gone up dramatically more than that—by 97 per cent in that period—so drink is much more affordable. In the same period, consumption has gone up by 20 to 22 per cent and the number of deaths has doubled. As I have mentioned previously, I used to work in my father’s shop and I cannot see a dramatic difference between the prices of whisky now and the prices that my father used to sell it at. That is simple and straightforward evidence that everybody can see. I have seen at first hand in Dunfermline the problems in our communities. There is antisocial behaviour and families that are absolutely wrecked by alcohol abuse and the health problems that it causes. People are desperate to get into hospital to get treatment so that they can deal with their alcohol problems. That is clear evidence and a clear result. We could easily go down the route of just doing the simple things that everybody suggests, such as education and information, but the reality is that the tougher we make the measures, the more impact they will have. I ask the Labour Party how long we have to wait for the perfect solution before we move ahead? The bill might not be exactly right and it might not have exactly the desired effect according to the predictions, but let us get on with it because the situation is dire. I referred earlier to public concern. I am a frequent user of Facebook and whenever I put up something about alcohol minimum pricing, the negative reaction is considerable. People out there will be angry about the measure, but if they are not angry, that is because we are not having an effect. For measures to be effective in reducing alcohol abuse, some people will have to feel them. That is why it is important that we move ahead with the bill. We have to be prepared for the backlash that I am sure will come. I am grateful for the support of the organisations that are represented in the public gallery. Health bodies such as the British Medical Association, the Royal College of Psychiatrists and Alcohol Focus Scotland support the bill, but there are also some surprising supporters, including Tesco, as I have mentioned previously. That is the kind of backing that we will need to get us through the coming period. The battle to deal with the problem has just begun. We need to ensure that we are effective in that so that we deal with the blight of alcohol on our society.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00654)

The British Prime Minister has pledged his support for equal marriage. Yesterday, President Barack Obama, too, declared in favour of it. Will the First Minister guarantee that he will bring equal marriage to Scotland?

If a British Prime Minister and a US President can proudly declare their support for equal marriage, surely the First Minister should not be so timid. This morning, his own MEP, Alyn Smith, has said: “too many politicians are too equivocal” on this. Why has the First Minister chosen to be one of the equivocal people who are criticised by his own side, instead of proudly joining the progressive world leaders in supporting equal marriage? If it is good enough for Obama, surely it is good enough for Salmond.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00638)

The First Minister is responsible to this Parliament. Why will he not tell us whether his phone has been hacked? Despite all the excuses, we have seen the First Minister man the barricades to protect Rupert Murdoch from a Scottish inquiry. [Interruption.]

What has happened? A year ago, the First Minister would have called Leveson a London-based court with a judge who has only been to Scotland for the Edinburgh festival. Now he says that that court is the right place for a decision on Scotland. When did he switch from being a roaring Celtic lion to being a Celtic mouse in support of all things English—of London courts, Trafalgar Square and morris dancing? Why cannot the First Minister decide to back an inquiry in Scotland?

It does not really add up. The Scottish National Party has a view on absolutely everything from the price of dog food to the Americanisation of Hallowe’en. I cannot understand why the First Minister will not stand up and be counted on this. [Interruption.]

Is it not the case that the First Minister has traded favours with Rupert Murdoch? Is it not the case that he defend him on phone hacking, stood up for him on BSkyB, and is now protecting him in Scotland? Is it not true that he is never on the side of ordinary people or the victims and always on the side of the rich and powerful?

As usual—[Interruption.]

As usual, the First Minister is selectively quoting. He knows full well that the reason why he was backing BSkyB and the reason why he was putting his interests above those of phone-hacking victims was because he wanted the support of The Sun. Why cannot he just admit that?

I hear what the First Minister says about Milly Dowler. Does he regret that terrible article in The Sun in which he played down the role of Rupert Murdoch’s papers in phone hacking? Is he ashamed that he put his political motives above the interests of the phone hacking victims?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00598)

On Tuesday, the report into the failings of NHS Ayrshire and Arran’s freedom of information regime was published. The report relates to the circumstances around the critical incident reports that were produced after the deaths of 20 patients. The reports were hidden and ignored and, as a result, lessons were not learned. This week’s report is very critical of NHS Ayrshire and Arran. It is clear that that board was institutionally secretive, but I suspect that it is not alone. How much has the First Minister learned about the other 13 health boards and their practices in the six weeks since I first asked about the issue?

It is four years since the problem began and it is a year since the Scottish Information Commissioner became involved. I hear what the First Minister says, but it is four months since the health secretary was officially told of what happened and now a report has been published that heavily criticises the board. Despite that, no formal Scotland-wide inquiry has been launched on health boards’ freedom of information arrangements. NHS Ayrshire and Arran might not be alone—other health boards might be falling short, too. The First Minister needs to act on a Scotland-wide basis. I do not blame him for the failings of NHS Ayrshire and Arran—no one would—but the problem is that, if he fails to act and to hold a Scotland-wide inquiry into the freedom of information arrangements of every health board, he might get the blame. Today, six weeks after I first asked the question, will he agree to hold such an inquiry?

The minister did not mention alcohol duty. Is that because he is embarrassed by the fact that he did not present the proposals until after the committee had taken evidence on that, which made that evidence worthless? The Scottish Government changed its proposal from devolution to assignation. The process was a shambles.

I note all the things that the member has said, but I think that she fails to understand the point. We made a submission to the commission as part of a process that was considering the issues in detail. We were not going to rush headlong into doing those things, as the SNP wanted to do last year.

I commend Linda Fabiani for her convenership of the Scotland Bill Committee. She was full of humour, professionalism and efficiency, and she always allowed us to have our say, sometimes at great length. I think that we all recognise that the Scotland Bill marks a significant step forward. It is a significant step, for us as Liberal Democrats, towards a home rule Parliament in the United Kingdom. The details of the bill—which have been covered this afternoon and include income tax, air weapons, drink-drive limits, national speed limits, stamp duty, landfill tax and borrowing powers—are significant steps towards what we want to achieve. Other members have referred to the fact that we have wanted other powers too, and there is no denying that. In fact, we are proud of our long tradition of campaigning for a home rule Parliament, and we have worked together with others to deliver that. Those changes will bring significant fiscal responsibility and control over our own affairs here to the Scottish Parliament. We should remember that the Calman commission was set up by the Parliament not one year ago, but four years ago. Its work led, after much considered debate, to the white paper that the Labour Party presented to the House of Commons during the previous Parliament. Subsequently, all three of the parties that supported the Calman commission put the implementation of its recommendations in their manifestos. One of the first acts of my colleague Danny Alexander, who was initially the Secretary of State for Scotland following the last general election, was to press ahead with the Scotland Bill. It has received extensive scrutiny from two committees of the Scottish Parliament and in an extended session at Westminster, and it has been the subject of endless debate in the media. The bill has been scrutinised endlessly. We must contrast that with what the SNP has done. Initially, it refused to take part in the Calman process; it even refused to submit evidence to the commission. When it came to the Scottish elections, the SNP had six big demands. Although it whispered those demands during the election campaign, they were red lines that it insisted the UK Government had to agree to—but it failed to make its case. Anyone who watched the proceedings of the Scotland Bill Committee will have been surprised at the level of ineffectiveness of the Scottish Government. The first paper that it produced was on the Crown estate. It was seven pages long, two of which were a history lesson; another page consisted of a map. The remaining pages were poorly argued proposals for the devolution of the Crown estate. The paper was not prepared properly. I turn to broadcasting. Stewart Maxwell likes rugby, and most of the Scotland Bill Committee’s evidence session on the broadcasting element of the Scottish Government’s demands was about rugby and Stewart Maxwell’s interest in it. I do not have anything against rugby, but that is not what we were talking about. We thought that the Scottish Government’s proposals on corporation tax would be similar to those for Northern Ireland, but that turned out not to be the case. Northern Ireland wanted control of the headline rate, whereas the Scottish Government wanted full devolution of the tax. We did not discover that until much later in the process, when the Scottish Government presented its paper to the committee, by which time much discussion had already taken place. Again, the Government’s paper was flimsy, poorly argued and poorly prepared. We have heard about what happened on excise duty. We were a long way into the process before we received the Scottish Government’s paper. We had already taken evidence from the alcohol groups, some of which said that devolution of excise duty would be a good thing, when we discovered that we were talking only about assignation rather than devolution, because of the implications for customs posts. It was a catalogue of errors and blunders.

Not just now. To top it all, we had the Scottish Government’s demand for full fiscal autonomy, which was slipped in at the end of the process. The Scotland Bill Committee considered the Scottish Government having control of 8 per cent of taxes—that is what the SNP asked for as part of its six big demands. From the evidence that the committee received on the 8 per cent figure, a majority of members on it—not including me—felt justified in asking for control of 100 per cent of taxes, or full fiscal autonomy. Despite the fact that the committee considered the devolution of only two taxes, the SNP reckoned that we could devolve all taxes. That is how shambolic the process was.

Because a process has to be gone through. Constitutional change is the result of a process. It must be a considered process and one that involves cross-party support and consensus. The SNP has always misunderstood that. Neil Findlay quite rightly highlighted the SNP’s inability over the decades to work with other parties. What has happened here is another example of that. It is necessary to work together to get such things delivered. Of course we want what the member is referring to—that is why we have a home rule commission. John Swinney described the bill as dangerous, a poison pill and a dog’s breakfast—those were his concerns about the bill. He also threatened to veto the bill and demanded a joint commencement order. The SNP thrashed, wailed and protested, but then it all stopped. On what basis? On the basis of two reviews and a couple of letters. Bruce Crawford did a commendable job in trying to big up all the significant changes that had been achieved, but they were not big changes. What was offered was already part of the process. If that satisfies him, that is fine. I have an apology to make to Bruce Crawford. I said on the news a few weeks ago that he was the worst negotiator in the northern hemisphere. I have reflected on my rather hasty remarks and I take it all back. He is a parliamentarian of the kind that I can only aspire to be, but even he could not have got a deal with the hand that he was dealt. He would not be able to negotiate with anyone in the northern hemisphere or southern hemisphere to get a satisfactory result from the case that was put forward after last May’s election, which was ill prepared, poorly argued and more focused on easy headlines than on serious constitutional change. We need to learn the lessons of this process. The lessons are that the SNP rushed at this process. We need to think about that in the context of the independence debate. If the SNP’s argument for independence is as poorly prepared as their arguments around the bill have been, independence will be a shambles.

Before the member continues, will he confirm that the Supreme Court will still have a role in Scotland?

Will the member give way?

Is Bob Doris not a bit concerned in the run-up to the independence referendum that the proposals that his Government will put forward will be shambolic, just as the proposals that were put forward to amend the Scotland Bill were? Was he not embarrassed by that process? Is he not concerned that the independence campaign will be a shambles?

Does the minister not feel just a tinge of embarrassment about the way in which his Government has prosecuted the case for the six whopping demands that Alex Salmond made last year?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00576)

The First Minister’s Government previously described proposals in the Scotland Bill as a “dog’s breakfast”, “a poison pill” and “dangerous”. The First Minister had six red lines. Last week, he decided to support the Scotland Bill. What has been the major change to it that we have missed? What has changed?

I can understand why the First Minister might be a wee bit reluctant to tell us that he was satisfied with two reviews over three years and a major concession on—listen to this—dental hygienists. He is some negotiator. If he tears up his red lines like that on devolution, how will he manage on independence, when he has to negotiate with the rest of the world? The Scotland Bill is a major step forward, and the powers in it are coming soon. How does the First Minister plan to use the stamp duty power and what will be the first capital projects that will benefit from the new borrowing powers?

The cabinet secretary has just talked about not looking at things in isolation, so surely he should look at the triple lock on pensions that has been delivered by the Government.

If the cabinet secretary is a fair man, why does his motion not include a single mention of the substantial increase in the tax threshold? If he is a fair man, surely his motion should have included mention of that.

Will Ken Macintosh confirm that if it came to power in 2015, the Labour Party would take the tax rate back up to 50p?

To rebalance the debate a little, we need to major on one of the significant developments in the budget, which is the major advance in delivering the Liberal Democrat commitment to raising the income tax threshold to £10,000. The budget will raise the personal allowance to £9,205 by next April. Across the UK, 21 million basic rate taxpayers will get an extra £221 cut in their income tax bills and a further 840,000 people will be taken out of paying income tax altogether. The budget brings the total tax cut for basic rate taxpayers to £550 and the total number of people who have been lifted out of paying tax to 2 million.

I will in a second. As a result of our budget, people who are working full time on the minimum wage have had their income tax bill cut in half. That significant development helps to make work pay and it helps millions of people on low and middle incomes who are striving to improve their lives through work. That commitment was on the front page of our manifesto, and I am very proud that we are delivering it. I give way to Mr Macintosh.

I am proud of the budget, because it delivers a significant cut to those who are on low and middle incomes. I thought that the Labour Party would welcome that, too, but hardly any of Mr Macintosh’s speech was devoted to that, and the same is true of Mr Swinney’s.

Go on, then.

We have to make choices in government. The member seems to ignore the fact that people on low and middle incomes will benefit significantly from the change. The budget is progressive. It has helped to make work pay and has incentivised people to work. I would have thought that the SNP would want to encourage people into work, but that does not seem to be the case. The budget continued down the path of fiscal responsibility that we set when we came to power in 2010. Those who argue that much more should be spent ignore the consequences of that. The challenge is to spend enough to stimulate the economy without spending too much and losing the confidence of the markets. There is a direct consequence. Despite the buffeting from the euro zone and elsewhere, we have successfully protected our credit rating, which keeps borrowing costs low. That affects not only Government borrowing, but personal borrowing and mortgages, the cost of which would shoot up if we did not keep spending under control. People who pretend that there are easy choices and that we can spend money with no consequences are living in cloud-cuckoo-land. Until today’s debate, I thought that Labour understood the need to live within our means and to keep the finances under control. However, it appears to have adopted the same approach as the SNP, which seems to have the single transferable billion. Wherever one looks, the SNP promises a billion or two on whatever people want—it makes promises on almost anything. If people want higher welfare payments, they have got them. If they want 50p off a litre of fuel, they have got it. If they want an oil fund, they have got it. If they want extra spending on capital, they have it. If Sir Rupert Murdoch wants corporation tax halved, the SNP will see what it can do. That billion has been spent numerous times, and people will eventually ask how hard worked it is and what the choices are. It is the hardest-working billion in Scottish politics. Despite the rhetoric on financial responsibility—there was even more today from Mr Swinney, criticising all sorts of other changes—the SNP is not fiscally responsible. In government, one has to make choices, even if that is difficult.

No, I am coming to the end. The budget helped not only working people but businesses. Let us go through some of the changes, because SNP and Labour members do not seem to give credit for some of them. Corporation tax will be cut to 22 per cent from April 2014. That is a big change. It will be the lowest rate of corporation tax in the G7 and the fourth lowest in the G20. Our measures on credit easing will also help money get into businesses, and the coalition Government is delivering 100 per cent capital allowances for plant machinery in Irvine, Nigg and Dundee. The Scottish Government has admitted that 4,000 jobs could come from that. It is a great development. Edinburgh will receive £11 million to deliver ultra-fast broadband and high-speed wireless connectivity. There will also be £50 million for which other cities can bid. Those are major improvements. There are also the corporation tax reliefs for the video games industry and the changes to oil industry taxation. The moves are significant, but one would not think it to judge by the comments from SNP members. Despite the challenges, the budget has delivered tax cuts for those on low and middle incomes, continued along the path of fiscal responsibility and provided support for businesses to help the country grow. I move amendment S4M-02494.3, to leave out from “is disappointed” to end and insert: “welcomes the measures in the recent UK Budget that will raise the income tax threshold to £9,205, meaning that 165,000 Scots will have been taken out of income tax since 2010 and more than two million working people on low and middle incomes in Scotland will have seen their tax bill fall by £550; welcomes the measures on tax avoidance and stamp duty that mean that the tax burden on the wealthiest increases fivefold, especially the steps that discourage the use of offshore tax havens by the well-off to avoid paying their fair share of tax in this country; notes that pensioners will enjoy the biggest ever cash increase in the state pension, leaving pensioners better off this year, next year and in future years thanks to the restoration of the link to average earnings as part of the triple-lock guarantee for pensioners, and also welcomes the package of measures to support the oil and gas sector, the provision of enhanced capital allowances for three of Scotland’s enterprise zones, funding for Edinburgh to become a super-connected city, a boost for Scottish ski centres through VAT changes, the National Loan Guarantee Scheme to help smaller businesses in Scotland receive cheaper loans, the introduction of tax relief for the video games industry and the introduction of a Patent Box from April 2013, which will apply a reduced 10% rate of corporation tax for profits attributed to patents and similar types of intellectual property.”

If Kenneth Gibson welcomes those initiatives, why did SNP MPs at Westminster vote against them?

Will the member give way?

I do not think that the member has realised that, as a result of the budget changes, five times as much will be brought in as the 50p rate was bringing in. Surely the approach is progressive. Surely it is the right thing to do.

We have had commitments on reversing welfare cuts, tax credits, VAT, fuel duty, national insurance contributions, child benefit, postage stamps and shovel-ready projects. The list of commitments is huge and I am sure that I have missed out some of them. Paul Wheelhouse said that this is not only about spending but about growth; there is an element of truth in that. It is about growth. It is about the balancing act between spending enough to stimulate the economy—which is partly what the youth contract and the extra capital that was accelerated in the autumn statement, were about—without spending too much, which would unsettle the markets. I think that he recognises that we have to consider that part of the equation. In that context, he was probably a bit embarrassed by all the commitments that his colleagues made on a range of issues. Paul Wheelhouse rose—

I will do so shortly. I hope that Paul Wheelhouse will have a word with his colleagues afterwards, because he said a few wise words and he would probably welcome a bit more control from SNP members on their spending commitments. I will take an intervention from him first.

I will also take Kenneth Gibson’s intervention.

It is interesting that Paul Wheelhouse did not disagree with his colleagues on their proposed extra spending. I will return to that shortly. On Kenny Gibson’s point, it is about a balancing act; it is about ensuring that we maintain credibility. Members will not have failed to notice that some credit rating agencies have considered our outlook. We must therefore constantly keep our spending under review to ensure that we are not being reckless. Kenny Gibson and his colleagues have fallen into that trap, which is why I disagree with them so fundamentally on all the commitments. Individually, those things are all worthy and I would love to do them, but we have to live within our means. Perhaps John Swinney and the First Minister have brought in two Nobel prize winners to try to make the sums add up. The sums do not add up just now, so perhaps they need Nobel prize winners to make their budget work for a future independent Scotland, because only Nobel prize winners could do that. That we have to live within our means is an important fact to consider. Several members said that there are some good things in the budget. I thank them for recognising that. However, they then continued to focus on all the bad and difficult stuff, without making a more balanced contribution. They looked at things in isolation, so let us look at some of the facts. We will raise five times as much as the 50p income tax rate would have raised. We will do that from the tough measures on tax evasion, the higher rates of stamp duty for expensive properties and the tycoon tax.

I will not just, now. I would have preferred to have kept the 50p rate—I think that most Liberal Democrats would—but we have to look at the practical implications. If more can be raised elsewhere, let us do that. It is not how we do it but what we raise that counts.

As a Liberal, I believe that the most important thing to ensure is that those who have the broadest shoulders bear the greatest burden.

That is where the debate comes to pensioners. A lot of tosh has been talked about the situation of pensioners.

Pensioners will actually be better off as a result of the measures. I know that members prefer to look at issues in isolation, but I remind them that the triple lock, which the Liberal Democrats in the coalition insisted on, will raise the state pension by average earnings, inflation or at least 2.5 per cent. I have to be a little ungenerous to the Labour Party in doing this, but I compare that with the 75p increase that Gordon Brown delivered. We have to compare that 75p increase with a £5.30 increase. I know that inflation is different now, but £5.30 is a colossal increase compared with 75p, and the budget is delivering it. We are also moving towards the citizens pension, which combines the state pension and the second pension.

No. At current expectations, £140 will be delivered, so pensioners will not be worse off as a result of this UK Government. We have to live within our means. Things are tough, but that is what we have to do. Members have been very keen to criticise the budget. I hope that Mark McDonald explains to people in Aberdeen that 99,400 people in Aberdeen will be getting a tax cut. Many other members have criticised a budget that is delivering progress. I wish that they would look at things in a more balanced way.

Ms Dugdale is considering things in isolation again. The change is substantial, and people on the minimum wage will benefit substantially. I would have thought that Labour would welcome that kind of progressive move.

Will the minister take an intervention?

The minister made some interesting remarks about APD and VAT, which I am sure he has made to the UK Government. Does that mean that he disagrees with the SNP back benchers who spoke on the issues of welfare cuts, tax credits, VAT on repairs, fuel duty, national insurance contributions, child benefit and the price of postage stamps? I do not include the shovel-ready projects in that list, as I am sure that Mr Swinney suggested that he agrees on those. However, if he does not disagree, his claim about fiscal responsibility is slightly dubious.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

Does Margaret Burgess accept that the extra £300 million that we are putting in through universal credit for childcare support is a positive thing?

That was a bit of exercise for Mike Russell. The debate has been a bit disappointing. We tried to focus on a serious report that the Daycare Trust and Children in Scotland have produced. The report is very authoritative and it looked at the contrasts between parts of the UK as well as within Scotland. I was disappointed that the debate turned into a bit of a partisan rammy.

No, I have only just started. John Park made a good speech. He said that this is an economic issue and talked about it from a personal perspective by considering the costs and the rigid work schedules that he has had to endure while trying to meet the childcare needs of his family. I have a similar personal experience, because I, too, have had difficulties finding flexible, integrated childcare through the hours provided by the state, supplemented by those available elsewhere. John Park’s contribution was significant. By contrast, others sought to focus on Westminster. I understand that there are anxieties about the tax credit system. Liam McArthur and Liz Smith alerted us to that and said that we need to review the reduction in the UK’s contribution to childcare costs from 80 to 70 per cent. I am not sure what else we can say—we are prepared to consider the issue.

I am sorry, but I must make progress. The SNP is encouraging us to look at some of the good things that it is doing, but it would serve SNP members well if they also considered some of the good things that the UK Government is doing. It is disappointing that not one SNP member mentioned the extra £300 million for childcare support under universal credit. The UK Government is also delivering 15 hours of care a week for three and four-year-olds down south, compared with the 12.5 hours delivered in Scotland. It is also providing for 40 per cent of the most disadvantaged two-year-olds, rather than just looked-after children, as is the case here. We are doing good things, such as developing shared parental leave throughout the UK. Moreover, the duty of sufficiency down south means that local authorities have a better understanding of the childcare needs in their areas, but that is not happening in Scotland. Those are good things, but not one SNP member mentioned them. They would be well advised to follow the John Park route and consider the issues in detail and how they affect people on the ground, rather than fire bullets at people. On the 2007 and 2012 commitments, I welcome the commitment that the First Minister gave over the weekend for 2014. It would be good to provide more than 600 hours, which would be even better than the position in the rest of the UK. That would be progress and we should all welcome that. However, he also said that the SNP would not rest on its laurels, but there are no laurels to rest on. There has not been great progress. The promise was 570 hours, but Scotland has 100 hours fewer than that at present. The SNP has power but, too often, it seems ready to criticise Westminster rather than scrutinise its own Government. Its back benchers have a responsibility to scrutinise their ministers on their delivery, but they rarely do that. They blame everybody else and look at faults in other parts of the UK. They would be well served to do their duty and scrutinise their ministers.

Talking of scrutinising ministers, let us hear what the minister has to say.

I gave the minister the opportunity to set out what she would like to do, but all she has done is follow the example of her back benchers and criticise Westminster.

No, I am trying to answer the minister’s question. Our ministers down south are making the case and we constantly challenge them, unlike the minister’s back benchers, who are just toadies for her Government. That is the problem. [Interruption.]

One of the serious issues that we need to consider relates to the integration and flexibility to which Liz Smith referred. How can working parents get fully comprehensive care? We should not think of childcare as just looking after kids; it is about education as well. How can we integrate those two aspects so that we have a comprehensive system that meets not only the needs of the kids but, as John Park has said, those of the parents. Those are the things that we need to look at. There is also the issue of our knowledge of the provision of care in local authorities, because there are huge variations. I am not saying that all local authorities should provide the same type of care, but we need to find out what is happening and the local authorities themselves need a greater understanding of what is happening in their areas. That is why a duty of sufficiency would be helpful. Local authorities in England have a much better understanding of their needs and their provision, which is what we should look to have here. It is disappointing that the Government was not able even to note “with concern” the report from the Daycare Trust and Children in Scotland. That smacks of complacency, which is something that the Government should be aware of.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00541)

Last week, I warned the First Minister about his unhealthy relationship with Rupert Murdoch. This week, the First Minister’s old friend, Donald Trump, turned into a foe. I will press him on another of his rich and powerful friends, and that friend’s influence on Government policy. The First Minister will know that I agree with him on equal marriage for gay people. I want to remove the barriers that prevent churches and other organisations from conducting same-sex marriages if they choose to do so. However, Brian Souter, a donor to the Scottish National Party, has well-known views against equality for gay people. Can the First Minister confirm that he will not give in to Brian Souter and that he will stand up for what is right on equal marriage?

Observers will note that the First Minister did not answer my question. It is simple: can he guarantee that he will not give in to Brian Souter? Equal marriage will be a mark of a modern Scotland. Last Sunday there was a big push by some churches to block the change. A cardinal said that it is “grotesque” and an archbishop said that there is a duty to stop it. The group Scotland for marriage went to the absurd extreme of saying that it would open the door for polygamy. Those are serious forces against us, and I do not want the argument to slip away from us. I ask the First Minister again: will he stand up to Brian Souter and take a lead for equality in Scotland?

I can only say that I agree with Jim Eadie. His remarks about the leader of the Liberal Democrats were absolutely spot on, and I will listen to him more carefully in future debates. My dad was a grocer in Auchtermuchty and Strathmiglo, and I used to work in the shop in the evening after school and on Saturdays. The price of the drink that my dad sold—bottles of vodka and whisky—is not greatly different from the price of drink now, 30 years later. The evidence that has been produced for this debate shows that alcohol is between 44 and 69 per cent more affordable than it was at that time, which confirms my recollection of the prices at that period. The price of alcohol has gone up by 22 per cent, but incomes have gone up by 97 per cent, according to some of the studies, which means that alcohol is much more affordable than it used to be. Those figures can be tied to consumption, which has risen by 22 per cent since 1980. The committee’s report says clearly that “there is a body of evidence that links price to consumption, and consumption to harm.” That is a simple, straightforward statement, and I agree with it. When I worked in the shop, I saw alcoholics coming in. I could smell the drink on their breath and knew that they came in every day—sometimes at eight o’clock in the morning, buying their cans of Special Brew. They had serious problems with drink, even back then. The problem has multiplied since that time. When I was the MP for Dunfermline and West Fife, people would come traipsing through the door to ask about how they could get access to specialist support in hospitals for their severe alcohol problems. I saw a variety of other cases as well, including pensioners who were deeply concerned about antisocial behaviour outside their houses night after night. The problem is severe. Since 1980, the annual alcohol-related death rate has doubled from 641 to more than 1,300. The evidence is clear, and we should accept that we need to put in place a serious measure. There is a correlation between how difficult something is to do and the impact that can be made. Education is easy. Politicians can always call for more education. We can send out leaflets and give talks, but the impact of that is not great. The stuff that is hard to do politically is to rig prices, but that has the biggest impact. We have to bite the bullet. The devastation that cheap alcohol causes in communities—it sometimes has the biggest impact in the poorest communities—means that we have a duty to make an impact on the problem. We have the evidence from the experts, who almost all agree with minimum pricing. The British Medical Association, Alcohol Focus Scotland and the Royal College of Psychiatrists have overwhelming evidence. Consider the time and effort that they have committed to the campaign and the number of doctors and nurses who write to me and say, “You have to do something about this.” That shows us their view. They have the evidence. There will be debates about the stuff on the edge, but if there will be fewer deaths—the evidence is there that there will be—we should support minimum pricing. We have the expert groups on side, we know about the problem and we have part of the solution, which is to deal with price, so we need to get on with it. Even Tesco is on side. Lucy Neville Rolfe from Tesco stated: “We can’t put up our prices because that would be commercial suicide, and we can’t act together to put up prices because that would be against competition law. The only safe solution is for the government to bring forward legislative proposals which Tesco and others in our industry can support.” Tesco is asking for minimum pricing, although others disagree. I am pleased to say that some have now backed off and are not as vociferous as they were. We have changed our position. I have personally always supported the minimum pricing of alcohol, because I thought that it was the right thing to do. For our party, the position was previously finely balanced, but I am pleased that I have persuaded it round to my point of view and we are now on the right track. I think that everybody accepts that price is a factor. I think that even Labour accepts that price is a factor and we are now debating who gets the financial benefit. I am not sure why Labour has lodged an amendment that calls for the profit to come back to the taxpayer—I do not quite understand that aspect. If Labour is saying that price is not a factor, I take back my comment. Almost everybody else agrees that price is a factor. Even the Conservatives, when they were opposed to minimum pricing, wanted an alternative solution, which was to do the same through the use of duty. That implies that they thought that price was a factor.

The evidence that I have received from some of the supermarkets is that the differential will remain and that we will get rid of some of the very cheap brands and the others will remain. If Dr Simpson has another point of view, that is fine. The Health Committee in the House of Commons has said that the policy should involve a combination of duty and price. The benefit of the UK coalition seeming to come round to minimum pricing is that we could perhaps find a solution using that methodology. We support such an approach. I appeal to the industry not to go down the route of the tobacco industry and to fight the proposal tooth and nail, because there is a will in the Parliament to deliver minimum pricing. I appeal to the industry: let us get on with it.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the cabinet. (S4F-00517)

In the first edition of The Scottish Sun on Sunday, the First Minister played down the role of The Sun, the News of the World and News International in the phone hacking scandal. By using the defence, “It wasn’t just them—others did it, too,” the First Minister lent his support to Rupert Murdoch, yet was silent on the victims of phone hacking. Does the First Minister believe that hundreds of phone hacking victims and their families will be satisfied with his failure to stand up to News International?

The First Minister prefers to cosy up rather than stand up to Rupert Murdoch. Earlier this week, he was caught bragging about Rupert Murdoch’s support for Scottish independence. We have discovered that Rupert Murdoch wants to break up Britain in revenge for the Leveson phone hacking inquiry, and our First Minister is only too happy to leap on that and ignore the victims. That was the trade: “I’ll scratch your back if you scratch mine.” The problem is not the column in The Scottish Sun on Sunday, the fireside chats with Rupert Murdoch or even the free tickets to the golf. The problem is that, rather than stand up to Rupert Murdoch, the First Minister has defended him and put his interest above the interests of the victims. Is the First Minister not ashamed of this grubby deal?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00484)

On the subject of NHS Ayrshire and Arran, and the response to John Scott’s question, I am now rather confused about the issue. It is clear that the First Minister knew about that emerging circumstance, but yesterday the Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy instructed an immediate report into the problems in NHS Ayrshire and Arran. Why has it taken three months since the PricewaterhouseCoopers report was published in November for the health secretary to act?

Why has it taken three months for us to find out about that serious problem? Earlier this month, I asked the First Minister about extending freedom of information laws, and he refused. This case shows the value of freedom of information. Kevin Dunion was very critical in his last report. He said that the case was perhaps “the most serious catalogue of failings” that he had ever dealt with. Yesterday, the First Minister’s personal friend did a great service. He is a persistent individual who stood up. When can we expect to see in the Parliament a comprehensive report on freedom of information that covers all health boards in Scotland, not just NHS Ayrshire and Arran? Will patients throughout Scotland have to rely on Rab Wilson, or will the Scottish Government do its job?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00454)

Before Scotland’s freedom of information commissioner, Kevin Dunion, stood down last week, he warned that Scotland’s freedom of information system is at risk of slipping behind that of other countries, including the rest of the United Kingdom. Surely that is a serious blow to our aims of being a beacon for progress. Why did the First Minister block the extension of information laws to cover housing associations, private finance initiative companies and other public bodies?

We are very proud of the progress that we made on freedom of information when we were in government; the First Minister should reflect on the progress that he has made. I also point out that it was Kevin Dunion who said that Scotland was in danger of slipping behind the rest of the UK. The First Minister seems to have let others’ objections overrule the commissioner’s sensible proposals. Access to information is important in a free and liberal Scotland if we are to challenge those who wield power. Why can tenants in Lanarkshire get information about their rent increases while tenants in Glasgow cannot? How can an arm’s-length company spending millions of pounds of taxpayers’ money dodge giving answers while councils cannot? It was not me but Kevin Dunion who said: “I am not entirely clear why the Government has decided to row back”.—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 10 January 2012; c 811.] Can the First Minister be clear? He always wants to be David but is he not now Goliath, blocking the rights of ordinary Scots?

We recognise that times are tough and that the budget settlement from Westminster is providing a difficult challenge for Parliament and the Government. We have to live within our means and Mr Swinney also recognises that there is no point in doing what the previous Labour Administration did in spending huge sums of money that we could not afford to repay, thereby losing the confidence of the credit ratings agencies, and threatening yields and borrowing costs. The UK Government has delivered an additional £750 million for this spending review period, and we welcome that. Mr Swinney’s earlier comments show that he also welcomes it. Obviously we would like it to go much further, but because we have to live within our means, the settlement is reasonable and it should help. We have had some constructive discussions with Mr Swinney and we welcome his approach to engagement. We have made a number of suggestions for changes to the budget. Not everything is there, but the priorities that the cabinet secretary has set out for the additional money reflect some of the priorities for which we have argued. For example, on colleges—it depends on how one reads the figures—I think that we have gone roughly halfway to the £38 million cut, depending on whether we include the £15 million, the £6 million for youth unemployment and some of the other figures that the cabinet secretary mentioned. It is a step in the right direction within the constraints of the budget settlement. We welcome that; it is quite a major step forward and a significant change from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning’s rhetoric last week, when he said that the settlement was “full, fair and final”. We are pleased that John Swinney prevailed and persuaded the education secretary that his Scottish colleges should get more money. We welcome that step in the right direction; the National Union of Students Scotland and the colleges will also be pleased. We will have to scrutinise the detail to make sure that there are no strings attached that will mean deviation from the colleges’ central purpose. The announcement on housing is also a step in the right direction, although we are deeply concerned that the SNP Government will not be able to reach its target of building 6,000 affordable homes a year—in fact the manifesto talked about social rented homes—especially when 81,000 people throughout Scotland are on housing waiting lists and there are waiting times of more than two years. If we are pulling back from the 6,000 that were promised in the manifesto, we will not eat into those waiting lists, especially given the tough targets on homelessness that we need to meet by the end of year. Nevertheless, within the constraints of the spending review, it is a major step forward, although we would like to see much more on that. Another area of concern for us is the air discount scheme for the islands. When he was a minister, Tavish Scott delivered the air discount scheme, which benefited charities, businesses and others. However, the SNP has withdrawn its use for work-related travel, which is having a significant impact on businesses. The SNP will say that Europe has imposed restrictions on use of the scheme, but we know that it can be restored to what it was. We hope that Mr Swinney will discuss with us how we can develop the scheme so that it can benefit the islands.

Certainly. Members: Aw.

That is the best intervention that I have ever had. I will let Liam McArthur intervene more often. I hope that the minister listened to what my colleague said. It is a modest scheme—it is not a huge sum of money—but it will make a big difference to people who live in the islands. The work that the SNP has identified on early intervention is another step in the right direction. It is something that we have argued for. In fact, we would go further. However, I am disappointed that despite our repeated reasonable requests about the £1.5 billion Scottish Water fund, which could make a significant difference in these difficult financial times by boosting the digital economy—some steps have been made towards that—on providing a science nation fund, and on improving the energy efficiency of homes and hard-to-heat buildings. It would also make a big difference on early intervention. The SNP has concerns that the Treasury would not give the money back and that it would somehow strip it away. Well, we can help. I know a Danny Alexander and I can have a word with him. We might be able to deliver. If the cabinet secretary is serious about extra investment in Scotland, will he engage in discussion with us to ensure that we make the best use of our resources? My final comment is on the fossil fuel levy. The SNP argued for years for it to come to Scotland, but we have seen no announcement about how that money would be spent. Given that we have been desperate to get it for so long, it is disappointing that we have not had detailed announcements about it. Perhaps, when he sums up, the cabinet secretary could set out how that money could be used to help us to move forward on renewable energy so that Scotland can play its part in the climate change agenda.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00419)

The First Minister published his budget in September. Since then, the United Kingdom Government has changed its plans and added extra money to the Scottish block. Since September, when he published his budget, how much extra money has the Scottish Government received?

For the second week running, I have asked the First Minister a basic question about financial control in his Government and he has not known the answer. He should not need to look across into Mr Swinney’s eyes for the answer. The Scottish Parliament financial scrutiny unit has provided a note that sets out that he has an extra £400 million available this year and next year. There have been 63,000 e-mails from college students, and the National Union of Students this week told the First Minister that his college cuts hit “the poorest people in some of the poorest communities”. I cannot understand why he is being so stubborn. We have discussed the matter before, many times. His cut is £40 million, but he has 10 times that available. Will he agree to look again at the budget and see whether he can do the right thing for Scottish colleges?

I hear what the members says, although I am afraid that I do not agree with much of it. She asserts that my good friend Lord Wallace is not trying to help this Parliament to deliver on its mandate. It is exasperating that she does not recognise that he is trying to assist.

We will support the motion and amendment. As many members have said, the claim of right was signed by members of my party and the Labour Party and by others from across Scottish society. It was a significant event in the pre-devolution era. It stressed the right of the Scottish people to self-determination, which should not be thwarted by any Government or party. It led to the Constitutional Convention and, subsequently, the referendum and the Scottish Parliament. It was a broad principle that asserted the right of people over Parliaments, not the other way round. It is something that Liberal Democrats have in their soul for all time. In fact, the preamble to our constitution reads: “We believe that sovereignty rests with the people and that authority in a democracy derives from the people.” David McLetchie has shaken my belief in this but, as a principle, it is accepted across the mainstream of politics that people have authority over Governments and not the other way round. I am surprised, therefore, that it has taken the SNP more than 30 years to support the claim of right. I cannot see anything in it—even the original version, as opposed to the trimmed-down version—to which the SNP should be opposed. Its stated aim is: “To agree a scheme for an Assembly or Parliament for Scotland”. It does not add “within the UK”.

I always listen to the education minister, as he has such wise words, but there is nothing in the claim of right that he could have opposed. I understand that he had objections to the Constitutional Convention at the time, but there is nothing in the claim of right that the SNP could not have signed up to.

Go on, then.

I am afraid that the SNP is always looking for the option to say no. I thought that it was the positive party, but clearly not so much. I would not be so cynical as to suggest that the SNP is supporting the right of the Scottish people to have sovereignty over their own affairs only because it is suddenly in government here in Scotland, but that issue comes to the crux of the debate. Malcolm Chisholm was right: it is a mistake to conflate sovereignty of the people with the right of only this Parliament and only the SNP to determine the future of Scotland. That is a subtlety in the motion and the assertions made by SNP members—that only they have the right to ask the people and to ensure that the people’s sovereignty is protected. In fact, politicians of all parties, no matter whether they are in Westminster or here, have to be guardians of that sovereignty. It is not the responsibility of just the SNP; it is the responsibility of everybody. That is why it is a positive step for the UK Government, in a constructive mode, to offer support to help the SNP deliver on its mandate. We recognise the mandate that it secured, but that does not mean that it has the right to do anything it wants to rig the referendum. That is critical. That was perhaps a note of discord, but I am pleased to see that some consensus is developing. There is movement in the right direction on the Electoral Commission, and people think that it is reasonable that the franchise on which members were elected to this place should be the franchise for the referendum. Furthermore, as Malcolm Chisholm alluded to, academics from across the board now recognise that it is impossible to have a multi-option referendum. We would end up with the odd 99/51 situation—with the 51 per cent beating the 99 per cent. That is just not possible. Most people now recognise that there has to be a straightforward yes/no question, with the current franchise and input from the Electoral Commission. Once that is agreed, we can get on to debate the substance. As Liberal Democrats, we support home rule for Scotland so that we can determine our own destiny on the domestic agenda in Scotland while sharing risks and opportunities throughout the UK. When times are tough, we stick together; when times are good, we can share around the wins. To me, that is the benefit of the United Kingdom. We get the best of both worlds. We have a strong track record on the issue. Over time, we have delivered with Labour and others the Scottish Parliament and now the Scotland Bill which, despite what Linda Fabiani says, provides a substantial transfer of power to the Scottish Parliament. We will continue to do that. With Ming Campbell’s commission, we will look to deliver as soon as we can, building consensus with others across society as we have done before. That approach respects the will of the Scottish people. If we were not to respect the will of the Scottish people, we would be making a mistake. That is something that we are determined not to do.

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

I thank the First Minister for providing an advance copy of his statement. Today, we will see much pomp and ceremony up at the castle, but we will still have few answers about independence. It is more Shakespeare than Burns—much ado about nothing. While independence dominates the work of his Government, our country is gripped by unemployment and rising costs. I want home rule within the UK family. Can the First Minister tell me whether, if devo max got 99 per cent of the vote, his Government would guarantee to honour the wishes—the will—of the Scottish people?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00404)

A year ago, the First Minister’s Government told us that national control of the police and the abolition of local policing would save £200 million a year. At the time, the Cabinet Secretary for Justice admitted that the numbers were not “pound perfect in any way”—[Official Report, 12 January 2011; c 32006.]. So what is the annual saving in the Government’s plans that were published this week?

The First Minister has obviously not read the document. He does not know the annual figure, which is the basis on which he proposed his plans. I can tell him that his own document makes it clear that almost all the headline figures that he cites are not attributable to structure—the savings that are described in the document are not attributable to the proposed changes. The First Minister promised us £200 million but he has sold us national political control of the police for nothing. Perhaps the First Minister has seen the chart that shows the structure of the review that is being done. The project board is made up of two deputy chief constables, a chief superintendent, a superintendent, two chief inspectors, an inspector, another inspector and a sergeant, all of whom have been taken from front-line duty to deal with governance and structure, and there are 12 other units like them. Is it just those officers who are working on reorganisation or are there more?

As usual, when he loses the argument, the First Minister resorts to cheap shots. He would do better to focus on the withdrawal of the local connection between the police and communities. He should be concerned about that—not about taking cheap shots at other politicians.

Will the First Minister give way?

The First Minister is almost at the end of his speech and we have not heard one legal basis for what he claims. The Secretary of State for Scotland set out the UK’s legal case. When will the First Minister set out his?

I wonder whether the member signed the claim of right.

I was struck by the wording of the Government’s amendment, which says that what ultimately matters is that we “achieve a parliament with the powers ... of independence”. Surely what matters most is that the people of Scotland get a referendum that is fair, legal and decisive. Let us remember that the SNP’s mandate is for a referendum; it is not for independence. When the Scottish Government says that the most important thing is to achieve independence, that implies that every other consideration is secondary. That is what we are worried about. What will the Government put second so that it can put independence first? That is why it is right to raise concerns about the legal process.

No. It is right that the Secretary of State for Scotland, Michael Moore, who is a Scot and a Scottish MP, should set out how the UK Government can help. The SNP has known about the problem since Donald Dewar told it in the early days of the Parliament that a referendum would be ultra vires, and it has disregarded it for far too long. It is important because, only around a decade ago, we remember, there were the hanging chads of Florida, which dominated the outcome of the presidential election in 2000 between Al Gore and George Bush. Thousands of lawyers flocked into Florida, argued for 36 days and launched 47 lawsuits before a winner of the election could be declared. The SNP complains about one Supreme Court; the Bush-Gore contest needed two. The First Minister rose— I will be generous and give way to the First Minister.

The First Minister knows full well that my friend and colleague Michael Moore is always willing to assist him in meeting his manifesto commitments, and that is exactly what he has done this week. He has helped using a reasonable tone, as the First Minister admitted.

No. We should remember that, back in 2000, the United States was paralysed by the legal process. We have been fortunate in the United Kingdom that legal challenges to elections have not dominated the political process, but that could all change. It is not the specific type of referendum—advisory or binding—that matters; it is the substance of the question that is posed that counts. That is the problem that we face. Constitutional matters are reserved to Westminster, even though the mandate on the referendum is here. I need to be absolutely clear. The legal challenge would not need to be made by the UK Government; it could come from anywhere at all. That is why it is so important for the two Governments and the Parliaments to work together to sort out the problem. My concern is that the result of the referendum would be determined by the courts, not the people, and that it would plunge Scotland into a pit of humiliation, just like that which was suffered by the United States. The referendum needs to be fair and decisive so that the settled will of the Scottish people can be expressed through the ballot box. That means that there should be one question on the ballot paper.

I do not have enough time. I showed in the autumn that, under the system proposed by the First Minister, a two-question referendum would treat the option of more powers for Scotland—for example, devo max—as a second-class question. Even if the option of devo max were to win by a landslide or 99 per cent, it would still be trumped by independence with only 51 per cent support. No constitutional expert has come forward to defend such a formulation, but the SNP remained wedded to it. For more than a century from Gladstone through Grimond, the Liberal Democrats have strongly advocated home rule in Scotland. Unlike the SNP, my party has worked constructively with others on the Scottish Constitutional Convention, the claim of right—which members should remember—and the yes campaign in the 1997 referendum. We are now working to deliver additional financial powers through the Scotland Bill. Of course we can go further than the Scotland Bill—indeed, we want to go further. In broad terms, it would mean Scotland raising more or all of the money that it spends while still remaining part of the UK. We will deliver that home rule by working constructively with others to develop a consensus in a constructive and orderly manner. Slapping devo max in a referendum without any worked-out plan is reckless and we will have no part of it. I am also puzzled as to why the SNP has rejected an independent expert organisation with an international track record in elections. The Electoral Commission was established with the support of SNP MPs, including, I presume, the First Minister—

I will, Presiding Officer. To imply that the commission is somehow politically biased is somewhat disrespectful to commissioners and their staff, not least the SNP’s own George Reid.

In the development of the constitution, there is a difference between the reckless approach that Joan McAlpine proposes and the orderly approach of the Liberal Democrats and other parties in the Parliament, who delivered the Scottish Parliament and the Scotland Bill without a single bit of support from the SNP.

You have read the script.

Will the member take an intervention?

I am glad that the member has paid so much attention to our policy development process. However, does she believe that only the adoption of the SNP’s procedure for securing more powers is legitimate? Surely the SNP’s track record on delivering more powers for Scotland is pretty shameful, and she should be a bit shame-faced herself.

Does the member not recognise that Michael Moore is trying to facilitate the process and make it legal? Does he not recognise that Michael Moore is trying to help?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. Yesterday, Scotland’s ministers at Westminster set out the United Kingdom Government’s proposals for a fair, legal and decisive referendum in two statements: one to the House of Commons and one to the House of Lords. They took 47 questions from members of Parliament. In Scotland, the First Minister announced his date for the referendum, not to the Scottish Parliament but to Sky News—although Brian Taylor disputes that fact outside. Given that the decision relates to what the First Minister called the biggest question for Scots in 300 years, and given that the Scottish Government is always concerned about the respect agenda, has the Scottish Government made a request to make a statement to this Parliament today? Is there any reason why you, Presiding Officer, would not be able to respond positively to such a request if it were made by the Scottish ministers?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00367)

I, too, welcome Johann Lamont to her position. Last week, the First Minister promised that he was taking seriously the £1 billion youth contract to help young people into work. However, during a long radio interview that I listened to yesterday, the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth did not even mention it. Will the First Minister set out how many Scottish businesses and young people could benefit from the youth contract?

The First Minister must be judged by his actions. I accept that he says that he will support the youth contract, but will he actively promote it? The answer to my question is simple. The youth contract can benefit 160,000 young people. The suspicion is that the Scottish Government is soft pedalling the policy because it was not its idea. By engaging with and promoting the policy, the Scottish Government can do something positive for young people. It also still has in its pocket £67 million from the UK Government. The First Minister can use that to reverse the cuts to colleges. He should take the steps that he can, rather than whingeing about the ones that he cannot.

The First Minister has had a great year. Members: Yes!

Will the First Minister finish off the year with some good news for other people? Will he embrace the youth contract and save colleges?

In the interests of the Christmas spirit, I think the First Minister should focus on the needs of the unemployed, rather than making cheap remarks about other politicians.

I may have to tune in to Finance Committee debates and meetings from now on—it has been a revelation. Kenny Gibson, the soft man of Scottish politics. I might not tune in, so do not be disappointed if I do not, but it was a great contribution; it was a great, measured start. I have had a good read through the Finance Committee’s report, which is a very thorough job that looks at all the details of the Government’s plans. However, I was surprised by the report, too, because there has been some quite strong criticism in some areas and, considering that the committee is dominated by friendly faces and that it has taken some time for the plans to come together, I am surprised at the extent of the criticism. Thankfully, the UK Government has provided an additional £500 million since the autumn statement, so perhaps some of those issues can be addressed by the time that the Government publishes its full, detailed report and response. I will start with the colleges and the Education and Culture Committee’s contribution to the report. The committee provided a valuable contribution and helped the campaign that is trying to secure the additional funds to reverse the cuts. A £15 million additional pot has been provided by the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning, but it is just not enough. The finance secretary is probably bored of me saying this, but it is important that we reverse the cuts. The £67 million is there and we should take the opportunity now—I want to press the finance secretary again today on whether he will reverse those cuts.

I think that Mark McDonald knows, as many have accepted, that this is a very difficult financial period. Everybody knows that it is difficult and we have to prioritise within the finances that are available. We cannot just wish money. However, the cabinet secretary has got money; he said that the colleges are important, but he is still withholding the money. The money could go to the colleges and remove the fear from students and staff about their futures. He should take the opportunity today to do that.

It is a consequence of the environment that we are in. It is a consequence of the economic recession that many countries in Europe and the world are facing. To pretend that Scotland is somehow isolated from that is to remove oneself from reality. The member has to face up to the challenges that we face. The next issue is capital investment. It is important that we hear from the finance secretary about which projects could be accelerated with the additional capital that has been received since he made his initial statement on the budget. We have had some contribution, in terms of the £430 million from the UK Government, but we also have the prospect of the Scotland Bill offering £2 billion in additional borrowing and the pre-payment facility that has again been offered by the UK Government. We have not heard from the finance secretary which particular projects will be accelerated and it would be beneficial for members to hear about that, and to hear whether he is recommending to his back-bench colleagues that the bill be vetoed. That is the prospect; that is what the Scotland Bill Committee, as Linda Fabiani knows, is threatening. We need to hear whether that is a reality and whether Scottish National Party members are prepared to live with the consequences, which are that that capital borrowing—that extra £2 billion—would disappear. Projects such as the A9, the A96 and electrification of the railways could be accelerated. We heard from Alex Neil that if he had £6 billion in the Scotland Bill—that is the SNP’s desire, ultimately—he could prioritise the A9 and A96, so obviously work has been done on which projects are the most important. However, it would be good to hear which projects would go if the Scotland Bill were to be vetoed and that £2 billion borrowing power no longer existed. I want to move on to preventative spending, because the committees have significant concerns about being able to identify where the money is and whether there is double-counting. As David Bell says, “there is a danger of double counting.” We need some clarity about whether the money is being prioritised for preventative spending and whether the £250 million saving from the Forth bridge contract will be spent on early intervention. It is important that we hear about those things; if we do not, we will not have clarity and confidence that, when the Government says that these are its priorities, they actually are its priorities. The Finance Committee’s report makes it clear that there is now no excuse for not stopping the cuts to Scottish colleges; that the Government should withdraw its threat to veto the borrowing powers in the Scotland Bill, which will speed up investment in transport; and that the Government needs to get its act together and sort out the answers to allow it to bring forward the truly transformational early intervention revolution that we support, which will set Scotland on a sustainable path for the future.

Does the member support the cuts to Scottish colleges?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00342)

I, too, wish Iain Gray well in the future. He has been a great servant in the Parliament and I am sure that he has much more to contribute. September’s unemployment rates showed a slight improvement but, like December’s, they were nowhere near good enough anywhere in the United Kingdom. Iain Gray is right that, in September, the First Minister claimed that those slightly better rates were a clear sign of his miracle cure—plan MacB. At that time, the First Minister said that plan MacB was “bearing fruit” and producing “dividends”. That was then, but now he blames the UK. With the First Minister, it is, “Heads I win; tails you lose.” However, there is no magic left in that trick. I am pleased that he is prepared to co-operate with the UK Government to meet that big challenge. Is he now prepared to work with the UK Government on its £1 billion youth contract, which has £100 million for Scotland?

He ducks and he dives, but we know what he said and we know what he meant.

The First Minister can no longer duck and he can no longer dive. My concern is that he says that he wants to co-operate, but on the announcement of the youth contract, he immediately talked down the £100 million that is available for it. He said that it was £6 million a year and he completely dismissed the £82 million extra, in addition to the £18 million, that the Scottish Government will get. Either he did not understand it, or he was trying to sabotage it. What is the point of trying to sabotage that major scheme? Scottish businesses need to know that the youth contract applies to them. Will the First Minister make it absolutely clear that it is a big scheme and that it is good for business and Scottish young people? Is he prepared to work with the UK Government to make the scheme a success in Scotland?

The infrastructure plan is a 20-year plan. The increased funding is provided within the first three years. What has been accelerated as a result of the increased funding?

I rise to speak in favour of the amendment in my name. It is important that I start by saying where we agree with the Scottish Government. We support the innovation in the use of capital with the non-profit-distributing route for attracting private investment, which was actually pioneered by Liberal Democrats in Argyll. We strongly support the Government’s new plans on early intervention and energy, and we have advocated and advanced similar policies for many years. On that basis, I was rather surprised that there was so little welcome in the finance secretary’s remarks for the measures in the autumn statement that Gavin Brown has just outlined. It is worth repeating those measures: the island fuel derogation, which is worth 5p a litre; the deferring of the 3p fuel duty increase and the cancellation of the inflation increase; the youth contract; the urban broadband fund for Edinburgh; and credit easing for small and medium-sized businesses. Those measures are all in addition to the cuts in income tax that are worth £200 to low and middle-income earners; the increased bank levy; and, at £5.30, the highest cash increase in the state pension ever announced. I was puzzled that I did not hear more welcome for those measures; in my view, they are welcome.

Let me make a bit of progress. I was even more puzzled by the remarks that the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment made yesterday to The Press and Journal. He said that the £6 billion extra borrowing that the Scottish National Party wants in the Scotland Bill would be used to accelerate the plans for the A9 and the A96. So, the Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment has decided where to spend that extra money—the money that he does not have—but the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth cannot tell us where he would spend the money that he does have, which is the £433 million of extra capital that the UK Government provided to Scotland in the autumn statement.

Obviously Mr Swinney has not spoken to his Cabinet Secretary for Infrastructure and Capital Investment, who has tremendous foresight. He can see 20, 30 or 40 years ahead and is going to spend that £6 billion—the money that he does not even have yet. A few fewer lessons from the SNP in that regard would be helpful. The SNP demands more borrowing but wants to rely on the interest rates earned by a plan to reduce borrowing in the UK. An increase in Government bond interest rates, as seen in Greece and Italy, on a £60 billion investment programme means a substantial amount of extra interest—billions, in fact. That would mean that schemes the length and breadth of Scotland would have to be cut or delayed. However, the SNP simply assumes that the hard-won UK credit rating and record low interest rates will roll forward into an independent Scotland. The fact that that extra spending can be debated in this Parliament today is a direct result of the UK Government’s early effort to put the public finances back on a stable footing. It was the tough but necessary decisions taken 18 months ago that stabilised the international credit rating, kept interest rates low and supported the economy. If we had followed the SNP’s so-called plan B, we might well have been in a very different position today, with a poor credit rating and higher interest rates, which would have put up mortgage payments and cost families more, and which would have cost jobs. I would not recommend that course. I hope that the SNP might reflect on its advice, too. I do not think that the Scottish Government is using all the powers and levers that it currently has at its disposal. It has ignored the views of its own independent budget review group and the Scottish Futures Trust, which both said that there was a better way for Scottish Water—a public body—to be structured to deliver substantial gains to the Scottish economy. Under our plans, we would use that money to deliver transformational change through early intervention; accelerate plans for broadband; generate new science-based jobs and businesses; and boost energy installation work to cut fuel bills. Those are positive plans that would have a lasting effect on the Scottish economy and champion social justice, but it seems that we have missed that opportunity. I repeat my call in relation to college funding, despite the £15 million that the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning announced on Radio Scotland this morning. He thinks that £15 million off a £74 million cut to colleges is a wand that will wave all the problems away. The money is there. He has the £67 million. He could spend it—he could announce it this afternoon in his summing up. Will he take the opportunity to reverse the cuts to colleges and stop the cuts to college places? This is an opportunity for the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to step up to the mark.

There are few households that remain unaffected by the current economic crisis. It is at times like this that I am reassured that Scotland is part of a bigger UK family so that we can share the risk, just as, in the good times, we can share the wins. I move amendment S4M-01501.2, to leave out from “that the Office” to end and insert: “; notes that the UK Government is investing £68 million in super-fast broadband in Scotland alongside £50 million from the Scottish Government, has won a fuel derogation for the islands from the European Commission, has deferred the 3p fuel duty increase scheduled for January in addition to the cuts in income tax worth £200 to low and middle earners, has increased the bank levy and provided the highest cash increase in the state pension ever announced; notes that the Scottish Government’s response is characterised by an absence of answers on its own plans, including for separation from the rest of the UK and publishing no opinion on the crisis in the Eurozone; is further concerned that the Scottish Government has published no analysis of the credit rating and interest rates likely in an independent Scotland, apart from an unsubstantiated assumption that the UK’s hard-won credit status and record low interest rates would continue in an independent Scotland, even though the evidence from across Europe is that governments that continue to increase borrowing without serious plans to tackle their deficit find that their borrowing rates rocket; understands that such a rise in Scottish borrowing rates on a £60 billion capital programme will result in billions of pounds of extra interest payments and lead to the delay and cancellation of capital projects the length and breadth of the country; finds it absurd that Scottish Government ministers have promised faster delivery of their published investment plans by incorporating additional borrowing made possible through the Scotland Bill while simultaneously threatening to veto the Scotland Bill; is concerned that the Scottish Government is still not using all of the current resources and powers at its disposal, not least on Scottish Water, which continues to have substantial resources locked in it when the Scottish Government’s independent budget review and the Scottish Futures Trust both offered alternative, public sector structures that could free substantial resources for investment in the economy; welcomes the UK Government’s £1 billion Youth Contract programme, which will see around £100 million of benefit to Scotland, a small part allocated to the Scottish Government but the vast majority provided direct to Scottish businesses to improve the prospects of a generation of young people through employment support; regrets that those prospects for young people are harmed by the Scottish Government’s continued plans to cut the budget for colleges despite the unexpected receipt of additional consequentials from the UK Government; notes that success in attracting investment by global companies in Scotland is best achieved by joint working with the UK Government, as evidenced by the recent result at Michelin in Dundee, and calls on the Scottish Government to set out the positive impact on its plans of the addition of £430 million capital consequentials, set out the projects funded by projected Scottish Government borrowing that would be lost if the Scotland Bill was vetoed and allocate its revenue consequentials, including a sum to prevent cuts to college budgets.”

Will the member recommend to his colleagues that they support the Scotland Bill, in light of the proposals on additional borrowing?

The member talks about the lack of borrowing by the UK Government. Does he not recognise that the stable conditions that we created in 2010 have led to the low interest rates and the low yields that allow us to borrow at all and allow us to keep the UK economy relatively stable?

Does the member not realise that almost £100 million is coming to Scotland? Even though it is not going into the SNP’s pockets, £100 million is going to businesses in Scotland.

Did the member not listen to the radio programme from St Andrews that John Swinney and I were on together? He admitted in that radio programme that he has a choice on pension contributions.

This has been another entertaining debate. At least we have the Labour members and the Green members here this week. I am disappointed that they missed last week’s fiery exchange between this side and the SNP. It was an interesting exchange that showed the paucity of arguments from the SNP in defence of its position. We heard first from the great Kenny Gibson. Only he could dismiss the biggest increase ever in the pension as something that was not worthy of support. Only the SNP would have the nerve to do that.

Not just now. Kenny Gibson referred to Norway as the great country that we should follow. Has he not listened to comrade Joan McAlpine, who now reckons that it is all about Alaska? SNP members are looking puzzled; they have obviously not read Joan McAlpine’s weekly article in The Scotsman, in which she recommended that Scotland aim to follow Alaska. The SNP should be a bit more careful, however, as Alaska does not have a national health service to which Scotland would aspire. Malcolm Chisholm made a very thoughtful contribution in which he talked clearly about child poverty, which I, as a Liberal Democrat, am extremely concerned about. Some of the measures that we in the UK Government have introduced are dealing with some of that, but I recognise some of the issues that Malcolm Chisholm raises. He also said quite rightly that the infrastructure plan was the longest wish list in history. John Wilson ignored the relative stability of the UK Government and the decisions that it has made, which have delivered some of the lowest yields on borrowing in the world. At least Paul Wheelhouse did not ignore that; he at least recognised—in what I have to say was a pretty depressing speech—that there was some merit in the argument that the UK Government had brought stability. Mary Scanlon is becoming one of my best friends. She made a strong case for the UK Government. [Interruption.] If SNP members would listen now, they might learn a little bit more. In a thoughtful contribution, she cited some of the context for the economic growth figures. I did not think that I would hear it from her, but she mentioned Tony Blair, who admitted the Labour Government’s inability to deal more rigorously with the situation at the time. We should be pleased that we have the Office for Budget Responsibility, because it gives us a much more objective view. Robert Chote should not be dismissed as someone of no consequence; he has tremendous merit as a former director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies. We should not belittle the OBR in the way that some SNP members have done. In addition, Mary Scanlon highlighted the fact that the UK Government spends £120 million on interest every day, which is something else that we should not ignore.

If the member feels that he has a contribution to make to the debate, perhaps he should intervene on some of the members of his own party. The OBR has recognised the necessity of the statement that the chancellor made last week. I would like to hear what Mr Swinney reckons the yields would be in the UK if we followed his advice to spend an extra £20 billion. What would the yield rates in the UK be?

Mr Swinney is a wiser man than that, so he should know that the UK has the yield rates that it has because of the decisions that the UK Government took in its early days to bring stability to the economy. Mr Swinney is suggesting that we should borrow £20 billion over and above—not instead of—what we are borrowing already. What would the effect be on yield rates in the UK if we followed his advice?

If we followed Mr Swinney’s advice, we could well go down the spend, spend, spend route of Greece, Italy and Portugal. [Interruption.]

It is worth reflecting on the extra spending commitments that members have offered in the debate: a tax reduction for the oil and gas industry; £20 billion of extra spending; a VAT cut; a higher pension increase than £5.30; money for public sector pensions; and the cancellation of the August fuel duty increase. In addition, I presume from all the criticism of the UK spending announcements that members would like to reverse all those cuts as well. Just how credible is that?

Will the minister give way?

Will the cabinet secretary give way?

The only apology that should be made in the chamber this afternoon should come from the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning to our colleges for the cut that he is proposing to make to young people’s training opportunities.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00312)

Last month, I asked the First Minister when he would make up his mind on college funding. Last week, the National Union of Students launched a campaign called our future our fight. It hopes to protect college student support and teaching quality, and to stop cuts to college places, yet Angus College now fears that 400 places could be lost, with another 9,000 being lost across the country. The First Minister’s Government is proposing a £40 million cut to colleges, yet it has more than £67 million in extra money available and unallocated. It is a simple equation. Will the First Minister today join those who want to protect Scotland’s colleges, join the dots in his own Government and tell us that he will use part of that £67 million to help colleges and their students?

I welcomed that announcement this morning. The First Minister made that announcement this morning; why can he not make the announcement on the colleges as well? It is completely unacceptable that he is treating colleges in this way. He made a 10-minute speech this morning on youth unemployment, but there was not a single word in it about extra funds for the colleges. He spent six minutes arguing about statistics. Surely the only two statistics that matter are, first, the fact that he has at least £67 million that he was not expecting when he published his plans and, secondly, the fact that he was planning to cut college funding by £40 million. He no longer has to do that. Why cannot he save the day by simply making up his mind? Why the dodge? Why the delay?

Take some responsibility.

It is, of course, right that I start my contribution to the debate by expressing support for the 500,000 public sector workers in Scotland. We may disagree about whether they should be on strike today, but it is clear from the hundreds whom I have met right across Scotland that they choose to work in the public sector because they believe in what that means, and that they are dedicated to their jobs. I fully understand their concern at the changes that are being made to their terms and conditions. That gives us some insight as to why this debate should be happening here in Parliament, and as to why this Parliament should be sitting. Irrespective of how some people try to portray it, Scotland is not a country of public sector workers. Half a million people will be directly affected by changes to pensions, another two million taxpayers also have an interest. They have to pay part of the pension bill and are entitled to have their interests represented here today, too. Strike or no strike, all Scotland’s public should expect to see their Parliament sitting to debate such important issues. A century ago, men in Scotland would have left school at roughly 15, worked for 50 years, retired at 65 and, perhaps, lived for a few more years. In more recent times, people go to university, perhaps have a gap year, start work at 25, will continue until they are 60 and then want a strong pension for a further 20 years. Therefore, to keep pensions the same simply does not add up. Some change has already visited various groups; people who work for private companies have seen the end of their final salary pensions; people with private pensions have seen annuity rates drop quite dramatically; and the cycle of world stock markets has meant that the value of many people’s retirements has been cut by tens of thousands of pounds. Of course people are concerned, but I am grateful for the steps that the UK Government has taken to ensure fairness in the proposed changes in order to protect those on low incomes—despite what Mr Swinney says—to increase benefits for many workers, and to ensure that all accumulated benefits are retained, especially for those who are only 10 years from the end of their service. Change to public sector pensions was always going to come.

As Jim Eadie rightly points out, that will apply across the public sector and across society as a whole. It is the rate that is used by the Bank of England. It is appropriate to use it because it more accurately reflects the costs that people bear. Even the Labour Party has accepted that public sector pensions should be reformed. In London—where Labour is not boycotting Parliament—Ed Balls has urged restraint and negotiation; and Rachel Reeves, who is Danny Alexander’s shadow minister, said earlier this month that “it has always been clear that public sector workers will need to accept higher contributions on average and, given that people are living longer, an increase in the retirement age, too.” Labour’s John Hutton produced the report that members have mentioned. He said in June: “Britain is becoming an ageing society and pension reform in the public sector, began by the last Labour Government, did not in my view keep pace with the accelerating nature of these profound demographic changes ... The costs increases are real and are set to continue for some time.” Public sector workers in Scotland who heard their Scottish Government say that it is against change, nevertheless found a letter in their post that informed them that the Scottish Government would make changes and increase their pension contributions. For all that the Scottish Government says that the state should continue to pay, when it came down to it the Scottish Government wrote to people to say that individuals and not the state should pay. When John Swinney and I took part in the radio programme, “Brian Taylor’s Big Debate”, in St Andrews, Mr Swinney said that if the Scottish Government were to bear the brunt of the payments, that would cut across what the Government is trying to do and its public sector employment strategy. That is exactly the point: John Swinney considered the choice that he had to make and he chose to make public sector workers pay more so that he could spend more. That is exactly the same decision and conclusion as the UK Government reached. It is no different in any way. On 4 October health workers did not learn that the Scottish Government had chosen to bear the burden.

The choice is this: if the money does not come in it cannot be spent. I know that the SNP is keen for more responsibility, but what hope is there for Scotland if it cannot accept the responsibility that it has? Public sector workers got letters from the Scottish Government telling them that their contributions would increase, just as contributions will increase for public sector workers in the rest of Britain. Exactly the same decision was taken. The Scottish Government could have opted to allow people to make the same contributions. It did not do so. It chose the same route as the UK Government had chosen. It is a surprise that the motion does not urge Mr Swinney to change his position and stop the increases in contributions in Scotland. We have been hearing all afternoon—and indeed for weeks—that somehow the Scottish Government is standing up to the UK Government. It is not standing up to the UK Government; it is doing exactly what the UK Government is doing. I imagine that the people who say that the state and not individuals should bear the burden—I am appealing to back benchers—will vote against the motion, because it does not say that. The motion calls on Parliament to oppose what the UK Government is doing, but the reality is that the SNP is doing exactly the same.

Mr Swinney has tried to distort what John Hutton said in his report. John Hutton had the opportunity to say that the UK Government should not increase contributions in the short term, but the reality is that he said that there is value in doing so. He was very clear about that. He said that there would be advantages in increasing contributions. That is what it is all about. If we do not get the money in we cannot spend it. The burden of pensions on the state is considerable and the balance is inappropriate. We discover today that the Scottish Government’s Scottish Public Pensions Agency recognised the seriousness of the challenge and recommended that even more severe action be considered. Gavin Brown was right to draw attention to that. Mr Swinney is not putting such proposals before Parliament because he is ashamed of the reality of what he believes. He is not prepared to be up front and to tell people exactly what he thinks. The evidence shows that Mr Swinney is acting in exactly the same way as the UK Government is acting. The cost of public sector pensions has increased by a third in the past 10 years. Change was always going to come. The Scottish Government protests that it does not want change, but it sent out the letters that trigger the changes. It will implement the scheme and it will make individuals pay more. Despite all the hype and bluster about the negotiation process and the UK Government’s motivations, on pension reform there is little difference between political leaders across the political spectrum in this country. Labour supports change. The SNP supports change. Members of both parties were out on the picket line today, pretending that they were with the strikers, but the facts tell a different story. I move amendment S4M-01440.2, to leave out from “notes”, to end and insert: “further recognises that the cost of public sector pensions has increased by a third in the last 10 years; believes that long-term pension reform is needed to put in place pension schemes that are sustainable and fair to both public servants and taxpayers; acknowledges that the UK Government’s reforms will protect low-paid workers and accrued pension rights and that UK ministers have put forward an amended proposal for reform that will provide more generous accrual rates and protect those within 10 years or less of retirement, and recognises that Scottish Government ministers have informed Scottish public sector workers that they have chosen to make these changes and increase pension contributions in line with changes being made across the rest of the UK.”

Does Jamie Hepburn accept that the Scottish Government has a choice about whether to increase pension contributions?

Will the member give way?

Rob Gibson has set out what he is opposed to, but what is he in favour of changing?

The member has outlined a number of SNP policies, to which a price is attached. Does she think that it is appropriate that John Swinney is increasing the contributions because he is not prepared to pay the price of not doing so?

Will the member give way?

Will the member take an intervention?

Does Mr Don support John Swinney’s decision to increase pension contributions?

We have heard from Jamie Hepburn, Christina McKelvie, Rob Gibson, Margaret Burgess, Mary Scanlon, James Dornan, Clare Adamson, Nigel Don, Chic Brodie, Joe FitzPatrick and Christine Grahame, but not a single SNP MSP opposed John Swinney’s increase in the pension contributions. For all their mock anger today and all their pretending to oppose the proposals, SNP members are right behind every increase in contribution.

I am very sorry for daring to accuse Mary Scanlon of being with the SNP mob. SNP members ignore the briefing, ignore the facts and pretend to be opposed to the increases in contributions.

Not just now. SNP members go on the picket line and say that they are for the workers, but they support the increases in contributions. A little more respect and integrity would be important in the debate. There is one point on which members agree: Labour members and the Greens should be here. The debate might not have been particularly enlightening but it has been useful, because it has exposed the fact that the guys in the SNP do not know what they are talking about. It has been useful at least to explore the issues, and Labour and the Greens might regret not being here to stand up for the communities that they represent. In the context of standing up for communities, I looked through the statement that my good friend Danny Alexander made in the House of Commons at the beginning of the month and found that after his statement he took questions from 47 back benchers from various parties, including members from Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. However, not a single SNP MP even dared to ask a question. SNP members had plenty of opportunities to take part, but not one of them did so. So much for the mock anger.

The member might have noticed that I have been asking about that issue all afternoon. Mr Swinney had a choice and he ducked it. The key point—[Interruption.]

There is a key point about Mr Swinney’s dodge and delay, and a few SNP speakers have got to the truth of the matter—that it is all about dodge and delay until after the referendum. The SNP refuses to face up to the difficult decisions that the country must make if pensions are to become sustainable, because this is all about independence and the thought that, somehow, when we are independent we will be in the land of milk and honey and will suddenly be able to afford everything and pay everybody all the pension they could ever want. The reality is different. The SNP is prepared to sacrifice sustainable pensions for its own narrow gain and for the sake of its independence referendum. It is a mark of the SNP Government that it refuses to face up to the difficult decisions that my colleagues in London are prepared to stand up and make.

As we seek a resolution, it does not help for members to pretend that they support the workers when the reality is that they are in favour of increasing contributions. Such dishonesty does not help us to have proper discussion and debate. Despite what SNP members have said, discussions and negotiations with the unions have been going on this month. If members check the facts, they will find that that is the truth.

Mr Adam raises a genuine point. However, the reality is that if we do not collect the money, we cannot spend it. That is basic. If we do not get the money in, we cannot spend it. If the Scottish Government does not take the pension contributions—I repeat that Mr Swinney has made the decision to increase the contributions—it cannot spend the money. It is straightforward. That is why it is essential that we have a bit of honesty.

Talking of honesty, let us hear from Mr Brodie.

It does not help that Mr Brodie is spreading scare stories about the viability of the pensions. The negotiations with the trade unions are continuing in good faith. It is completely dishonest of Mr Brodie to suggest that people will somehow walk away from those pensions, and I hope that he reflects on his remarks. There has been lots of misinformation about low-paid workers. The proposed changes are progressive changes. For those who do not know what that means, it means that those who are on the lowest incomes will not pay any increase in contributions and those who are on the highest incomes will pay the most.

No, I do not think that I will. Those who have the biggest shoulders will take the biggest burden. Members should check the facts before they speak.

The debate has not been enlightening, but the one thing that we have heard from the SNP is full support for the increase in contributions that Mr Swinney has imposed.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00285)

In an independent Scotland, would soldiers serving in United Kingdom regiments be required to leave the British Army and join the Scottish Army?

The First Minister is correctly quoting from his “Talking Independence” document, which says that “all serving military personnel from Scotland ... will be given the opportunity to transfer to the Scottish Defence Force.” I met British soldiers in Afghanistan. They risk their lives every day for each other, no matter which part of the UK they come from. It is a strong, human bond, built on loyalty. The First Minister wants them to break that bond for his independence agenda. Why does he want them to choose between their colleagues and their country?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00254)

Last month, I asked the First Minister whether he would use part of the £67 million additional funding that his Government has been allocated to stop the £40 million cut to Scotland’s colleges. He was not able to answer then. Is he any closer to making a decision?

The issue is urgent. The First Minister has £67 million that he did not expect. Scotland’s colleges are doing great work helping people to get up and get on in the world, but Angus College predicts that it will lose 400 full-time places, Borders College could lose seven full-time courses and principals say that they cannot guarantee quality or student numbers. The First Minister could take a positive step today and unite the Parliament for the good of Scotland and announce that he will use the extra money to protect colleges. It makes no sense to continue to delay that decision. Why is he not able to give certainty right now? Does he not understand that it is urgent?

3. To ask the Deputy First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00228)

More than 1,000 deaths and countless acts of antisocial behaviour in Scotland are as a result of the abuse of cheap alcohol. How concerned is the Deputy First Minister that retailers are openly promoting their online delivery services and other underhand tactics to get round the law that the Scottish Parliament agreed last year to limit multibuy discounts? Will she join me in condemning that behaviour?

Big business has already tried to undermine the democratic will of the Parliament on the 2010 legislation. As the Deputy First Minister points out, we support the Government’s fresh plans for alcohol minimum pricing, as do the Greens and some others in the Parliament. Some businesses get it as well and support the plans, but others do not understand that they have a social responsibility to the communities in which they operate. Big business has lost the argument on the need for strong action on alcohol, but it now resorts to threats of legal tactics, using its wealth and might. What message does the Deputy First Minister have for big business acting in that destructive way? How will the Government get the message out to big business that it needs to back off?

On a point of order, Presiding Officer. I seek clarification, further to the points of order that were raised earlier. Professor Qvortrup was clear that the Scottish National Party’s two-question referendum is untenable, but today the First Minister delivered a fabricated endorsement to the chamber. He quoted a letter that turns out to have been written not by the professor, but by the First Minister’s special adviser in his own office this morning. This is a blatant attempt to nobble an academic, to doctor the evidence and to pull the wool over the eyes of the people of Scotland. An apology is not enough. Presiding Officer, will you make time for an early meeting of the Parliamentary Bureau so that a full debate can be held on the Government’s conduct on this matter?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00182)

The First Minister’s treatment of Iain Gray today was, I thought, appalling. He raised genuine concerns and it demeans the First Minister constantly to impugn his motives. [Interruption.]

The First Minister is planning £40 million of cuts to Scotland’s colleges next year, but this week he has been given £67 million of extra money by the Treasury. Surely what to do with that money is a no-brainer?

So, no answer again—no answer. Before the election, the First Minister worked with us and the other parties to increase support for colleges, providing extra places and more bursaries. It is a shame that when he gets a majority he changes his mind. Hundreds of thousands of people rely on colleges. The Government’s promises on apprenticeships need colleges. His own guarantee to young people depends on them. There is a simple, sensible choice for the First Minister: will he or will he not use the extra money from the Treasury to train more young people ?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00162)

This morning, I met the latest recruit to the Liberal Democrats: Councillor Mike Dillon from Paisley who, after a brief flirtation with the Scottish National Party, has returned to the Liberal fold. That is good news. However, it is not such good news that there are an estimated 830,000 victims of crime in Scotland every year. What will the Scottish Government do to support victims?

I say to the First Minister that Mike Dillon is back with us. [Interruption.]

The serious issue is that the First Minister has relegated his victims’ rights bill out of this year’s legislative programme. Will he agree to change his mind and introduce it this year? Will the First Minister also increase the amount of work and training that takes place in prisons and start to use some of the proceeds from prisoners’ earnings to help victims? Steps are being taken elsewhere in the UK to help to make that happen. Would not such a move assure crime victims that their interests are being taken seriously?

I thank the finance secretary for the advance copy of his statement and for the extensive number of books that he provided. I cannot say that we have read them all yet, but we will do so in the coming weeks. I am sure that there will be more debates on the substance. Often, the presentation in such statements is not the reality that we go on to discover, and I hope that we will return to the issues in more detail. Perhaps Mr Swinney should have looked at the budget at an earlier stage. The delay of a year in making such difficult decisions has prolonged the agony. Whatever we think about the UK’s budget decisions—and some members in the chamber today will not approve of them—we cannot say that the UK Government has taken a short-term approach. It is looking to the long term and making long-term decisions to get public services into sustainable shape for the future. It is unfortunate that the SNP Government has sought to dodge and delay endlessly over the last period. Even today, we do not know all the detail of the budget’s impact. At the end of the day, we are talking about vulnerable people being affected if services are not made sustainable and if the framework that we need to tackle the big challenges for the future is not created. For the Liberal Democrats, the economy is one of the big issues. I have three points to make. The first is on the council tax freeze. Our pledge was for a two-year freeze, whereas the SNP promised a five-year freeze. Those who have the biggest incomes and live in the biggest houses will make the biggest gains from a council tax freeze, and I am not sure that this difficult time is the right time for the freeze. I urge Mr Swinney to reflect on that decision. I am not sure that giving someone such as Sir Fred Goodwin a £2,900 council tax break should be our priority when we face such challenging economic times in Scotland.

No; I will not take interventions yet. I might come back to the member. The second issue is the bridge that has not yet been built across the Forth. Mr Swinney has cut £250 million from the transport budget, but he said that he has made savings. Instead of investing that money in other capital infrastructure projects that would generate jobs and growth, he has decided to spend the money on other priorities. He criticises the UK Government for the reductions in capital spend, yet he cuts £250 million from the transport capital infrastructure budget. A bit more consistency from Mr Swinney on that front would be helpful. Thirdly, Mr Swinney did not include in his statement our plan for Scottish Water, and I would like him to look at it again. As a result of our plan, considerable sums could be invested in science, warm homes, young people and business. Some of the priorities that are in Mr Swinney’s documents are also our priorities, and our Scottish Water plan would have been a mechanism for delivering those things, but he has turned his face against it. Mr Swinney also had the cheek— Members: Oh! —to mention the Christie commission in the same section of his speech in which he mentioned the reform of police and fire services. The Christie commission explicitly stated that it was against top-down, silo-mentality, big-bang changes and the centralisation of power, but that is exactly what the reform of police and fire services is. I do not know how Mr Swinney was able to mention those two things in the same section of his speech.

No. The SNP should reflect. If it is going to take on these commissions and get great men such as Campbell Christie to look at proposals, it should have the decency to follow through on some of their priorities, such as those that the Christie commission mentioned. It was raining earlier. The coalition is always responsible for the rain; the SNP is responsible only for sunshine. However, people realise that there is a bit more of a partnership. In his spending statement today, Mr Swinney painted a situation in which the UK does only bad things and the Scottish Government does only good things. There were some job losses today at Highland Toffee, which is a really bad thing. That happened in Scotland. In the same country, Amazon jobs have been created over in Fife, and I give Mr Swinney credit for the work that he did on that. However, I want a bit of recognition that the UK Government impacts on Scotland’s economy and contributes to the stability and conditions that created those jobs.

No. There is a partnership between the two Governments, and it demeans Mr Swinney and his office for him to present the situation in black-and-white terms and to say that the UK is responsible only for the bad things and Scotland is responsible only for the good things. The big disappointment in all of this is that Mr Swinney is continuing to duck responsibility. He takes credit for the increase in spending for the national health service but passes the responsibility for dealing with local government cuts on to local authorities. We understand that difficult decisions have to be made but the cabinet secretary should at least step up and accept some of the responsibilities of office and the fact that we have to work together in partnership to achieve change.

Will the member give way?

Does the member not realise that money does not grow on trees? [Laughter.] If you don’t get the money in, you can’t spend it. It is a simple formula. I advise the member to go back and look at that again.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00121)

Before the summer, the Scottish Government said that Supreme Court judges were ambulance chasers who visited Scotland only for the Edinburgh festival and that the Supreme Court was a court in another land. Yesterday, the First Minister welcomed his expert group’s conclusion that the Supreme Court has a role to play for Scots and is well qualified to do that. Has he dropped his threat to cut the court’s money?

The First Minister’s tone is certainly different from the inflammatory tone that he and the Cabinet Secretary for Justice adopted before the recess. However, the First Minister was at it again yesterday in his press release. That is why Lord Steel resigned from the Presiding Officers panel. The review supports the Supreme Court—it wants to widen access and it says that the court is particularly qualified to do the job. In the summer, we saw the First Minister’s toxic mix of prejudice and nationalism. Will he agree that that has no place in the future and will he change his ways?

I apologise to the Presiding Officer and members in the chamber for arriving marginally late; I need a better alarm clock in order to arrive on time. Legislation is one of our primary duties in this place and at Westminster, and we must ensure that there is proper debate, consultation, scrutiny, deliberation and reflection before a conclusion is reached. That is especially the case with regard to constitutional changes, which require special consideration because they are supposed to be lasting and fundamental in nature. The SNP, however, seems to have departed massively from that well-established best practice and neglected all those key elements in their demands for corporation tax to be devolved. The Calman commission was set up around four years ago, at which time the SNP refused to take part. The Scotland Bill was subsequently published and is progressing well through the House of Commons—in fact, it has been through the House of Commons, and has achieved its second reading in the House of Lords. We are making significant progress. Just last week, however, the SNP demanded—at this stage in the process and in probably its most substantial paper to date—that corporation tax be devolved.

The mandate that the UK Government achieved in 2010 was also significant. We introduced, with Conservative support, a Scotland Bill that would never have seen the light of day if other Governments had been in charge on their own. We have already made significant progress, but we have done it in an orderly and substantial fashion, not in the reckless manner of those who demand changes at the last minute based on flimsy evidence that does not stand up and which has been criticised by many people across the business sector and beyond in Scotland.

No—I have only six minutes for my speech. The SNP has claimed that, through corporation tax cuts similar to those in Ireland, we can achieve economic growth rates similar to those in Ireland. In 2007, Alex Salmond claimed: “we have everything it takes for a Celtic Lion economy to take off in Scotland.” However, Mr McLetchie set out the case on that extremely well. As he pointed out, Ireland started in a very different place from Scotland and it had the benefit of being first off the mark in achieving the advantage from businesses that were looking to relocate there. Scotland would have to reduce its rates significantly to compete with Ireland on that level. In recent days, the SNP has pulled back a bit—now it proposes a corporation tax rate of only 20 per cent rather than the implied 12.5 per cent—so we no longer even seek to compete with the Irish levels, but the rhetoric that we could achieve what Ireland did has not diminished in any way whatever.

No—I have only a limited time. Our main concern is about the effect on the public finances. Many members have criticised the UK Government for the public spending cuts that have been made, but we believe that making those cuts is absolutely necessary to get the public finances back in order. The SNP has failed to spell out the price of its claim—the cost to the public purse at an already challenging time. I have described how Scotland would not have the economic benefits that Ireland had, because tax would not even go down to Irish levels.

No—I do not have enough time. The crucial element that we require to progress in the debate is that the SNP comes clean and spells out the price. The UK Government has said that the cost would be £2.6 billion. The brains in the Treasury are better than mine and I am sure that they can justify the case for the £2.6 billion. [Interruption.] The minister protests, but the SNP has not provided its own figures. We have had no calculation whatever.

The minister knows perfectly well that the information is not arithmetically illiterate. The Treasury has set out the case and the projections for 2015. Considering all the other implications, it estimates a cost of £2.6 billion. The minister protests, but the crucial point is that he has not provided his own figures, because he knows that the impact on public spending in an already tight period would be dramatic and that the economic growth claims are not substantiated in any way whatever. Fergus Ewing indicated disagreement. The minister shakes his head, but he has no answers. That is why the careering towards devolving corporation tax, which has involved not following the proper process, not spelling out the figures and not substantiating the economic growth claims, shows that the SNP is tremendously reckless with the proposal. The Government’s response to serious business opinion in Scotland has had a touch of bullying about it. When the CBI made a reasonable interjection in the debate two weeks ago, the response was to accuse it of blundering into the constitutional debate and to say that it was no surprise that the CBI’s membership numbers were reducing.

Certainly. What I described is no way to treat serious business opinion. The SNP needs to treat people with a bit more respect if it is to get more powers. I move amendment S4M-00856.3, to leave out from “strategy” to end and insert: “and in providing resources to pay for public services; notes that the Scottish Government’s own discussion paper on options for reform states that cutting corporation tax could ‘lead to an immediate reduction in revenues collected in Scotland’ and that, if such a position was adopted, ‘decisions regarding budgetary priorities would be needed’, and calls on the Scottish Government to identify now which budget lines would be reduced as a result of implementing a policy to substantially reduce corporation tax levels in Scotland.”

It has been a rather shambolic and sometimes heated debate, which probably proves the point that I was trying to make at the beginning: we have not reached a considered consensus on the way forward with corporation tax. That is partly because we have had a rushed process and a proposal that was submitted to the debate at the very—

Certainly.

Mr Findlay makes a very important point. A considerable weight of opinion has been expressed that has been critical of the SNP’s proposals. However, it has been met with derisory comment, criticism and abuse. That is inappropriate and not conducive to a constructive debate. Bob Doris made a reasonably considered contribution to the debate—maybe that has condemned his career for ever—but he revealed what this is really all about. It is the creeping move towards independence. Members: No! Well, the SNP is focusing on spending a year on changing a Scotland Bill that it confidently expects to abolish in a referendum. Why are we doing this? It is because the SNP wants to pull the wool over the eyes of the Scottish people. It wants to take them step by step towards independence. It should be a bit more honest.

Mr Doris should read the Steel commission.

It made a number of different suggestions to be considered by a commission, but it did not recommend the devolution of corporation tax. I advise Mr Doris to go back and read it again. Perhaps he misrepresents the Steel commission in the same way as his colleagues misrepresent the CBI and other organisations. John Mason made an even more considered contribution to the debate. He covered a number of areas, and considered not only the headline rate but a targeted approach. However, Gavin Brown was quite right about the balance between simplicity, complexity and targeting, which has to be considered, but Mr Mason made a good contribution to the debate. Neil Bibby was right to highlight the race to the bottom and the effect that cuts would have on public services. Kenny Gibson—in his usual bombastic style—was criticising us all for being negative. However, I did not hear him praise the fantastic transfer of financial powers that is the Scotland Bill. Was he a bit too negative about that significant change for the Scottish Parliament? James Dornan said that we have been subservient to Westminster. Why then did we—the Liberal Democrats, Labour and others—deliver the Scottish Parliament, when the SNP sat on the sidelines throughout the Scottish Constitutional Convention? If we were so against Scotland, and if we were so subservient to Westminster, why did the SNP not join us? Why did the SNP opt out of the Constitutional Convention? Fewer lectures from the SNP on standing up for Scotland would make for a better contribution. Margaret McCulloch highlighted the difference between a competitive economy and a low-tax economy. She pointed out the significant benefit of having skills and talent, and the wider contribution that businesses can make. Of course, she is right that all businesses would want lower taxes, but a balance has to be struck between investment in public services and having a competitive low-tax economy. We are not against cutting corporation tax; that is why we have done it at a UK level. However, it has to be done as part of an orderly programme, and it has to be budgeted and planned. The one thing that we certainly do not get from Mr Ewing is any transparency about the costs. Perhaps he thinks that they would be too embarrassing to reveal to the public, because the effects—

I am in my last minute. As I was saying, the effects would be significant. That is why Mr Ewing is not telling us the truth about the costs of this policy. The Treasury minister David Gauke has asked the Scottish Government a number of questions, which I hope Mr Ewing will address in his closing remarks. Mr Gauke raised, for example, the benefits of having a unified corporate tax regime throughout the UK. Will we be ignoring that idea? How will the SNP reduce administrative burdens on businesses if there are different rates in different parts of the country? Is the SNP Administration proposing a separate regime? James Dornan seemed to imply that we would have a separate taxation regime. I hope that the SNP will come up with some of the answers that we have been begging for for months.

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00099)

An hour ago, the Advisory Committee on the Safety of Blood, Tissues and Organs recommended that the lifetime ban on gay men donating blood should be rescinded. What will the First Minister do in Scotland to respond to that report?

That is good news and is very welcome. It is not the full equality that many of us have campaigned for, but it is a start. Similar bans have been relaxed in Australia, South Africa, Japan and Sweden and the Scottish National Blood Transfusion Service is committed to finding 65,000 more donors in the next year. The sooner the change is adopted, the sooner the service can add to the 100,000 patients it helps with blood transfusions every year and save lives. Will the First Minister personally promote this change and encourage more people to donate blood, whatever sexuality they have?

I am not sure that the Alex Salmond of 40 years ago would have believed that he would lead his party or that he would be a member of a Scottish Parliament. He would probably have scoffed at the idea of becoming the First Minister of Scotland—twice. But perhaps that shy, retiring exterior is just a mask. This is a big day for the First Minister, so I will begin on a note of consensus. The Liberal Democrats initially opposed the SNP’s plans to tackle the blight of alcohol, which holds back communities, but we have now reflected and considered, and we will support them. [Applause.] I did not think that I would ever hear that, to be honest. The approach is backed by a wide range of health bodies. Alcohol hits communities with antisocial behaviour, the health effects are severe, and it impacts on children and families. As a Liberal, I want to remove the barriers that hold people back from getting up and getting on in their lives, and the excessive drinking of alcohol is one of those barriers. The smoking ban, which Iain Gray mentioned, was a success. It was a bold measure by the previous majority Government, and I think that we can also tackle in the Parliament the blight of alcohol. My colleagues and I will work with the Government to make the proposals a success. The Liberal Democrats have been prepared to reconsider our position on a major area of policy. I urge the First Minister to do likewise on the police and the fire service, but fear that he is destined to continue to ignore all opposition to the proposals that have been made. The Liberal Democrats are instinctive decentralisers; putting power in the hands of the minister at the centre is the exact opposite of decentralising. The Government’s plans will have an immediate increased cost in already challenging times, and will risk front-line policing. Big top-down reorganisations never save the money that they promise. Too much power will be put in the hands of only three people, and the opportunities to have complaints and discipline supervised by an independent force will be stripped away. Those are the reasons why 78 per cent of rank-and-file police officers and seven out of eight chief constables are against the proposals. I hope that the Government will have a change of heart. Disregarding advice is one of the things that the Government has a habit of doing. It set up the Christie commission to advise on public services, which was a way to dodge and delay any decisions until after the election. There simply was not enough in the First Minister’s statement to show that he is taking forward the Christie vision. Where were the plans to enshrine localism in public services and put the user in control? Where were the plans to integrate local services rather than have top-down silos? Where is the legislation recommended by Christie to make it a duty on public bodies to take preventative action rather than simply pay up for solutions to problems that could have been avoided? The First Minister has not done the Christie commission justice. I will need to be convinced that adding more laws will tackle the problem of sectarianism, which has been shown in recent weeks to be above simple law making. Legislating to send a message often makes bad law. On the rest of the programme, I hope that I can encourage the Scottish Government to consider my party’s proposals on real reform to Scottish Water to create a future for Scotland fund and create jobs; its proposals to reform regulation and procurement to help Scottish businesses; its plans to make Scotland a science nation; and its proposals on action to tackle top pay and bonuses. Those are solid plans for jobs and growth. We are not proud; we would be happy for the First Minister to pinch our ideas. Instead, for all his bluster today, his solution to the world’s economic problems stretches to two sides of A4. He did not even mention that he has chosen to strip £250 million from transport capital investment to spend in other departments. The biggest threat to Scotland’s economy is the First Minister’s plan to split Scotland from the rest of the UK. If Alex Salmond predicted 40 years ago that he would be First Minister with a majority, I am sure that he did not envisage that his first legislative programme would fail to include independence. Seventy years on from the creation of the SNP, the First Minister hardly even mentions the sole reason for that party’s existence. Everything that this Government does has a purpose: securing independence. However, no answers have been offered and there is no timetable for answers. Last week, the Secretary of State for Scotland asked the SNP Government six simple questions about independence: what regulation would be applied to our banks and who would enforce it? Which currency would Scotland adopt? He also asked about membership of international organisations; our armed forces; pension liabilities; and, the bottom line, the cost of independence, but he did not get any answers. He was referred to a booklet from two years ago, but it did not have the answers either. This session of Parliament will be dominated by independence, but that is the one issue that the SNP Government is determined to avoid discussing. While Scotland waits, the SNP refuses to declare, debate or even discuss the cost of independence. The only people who are stopping them trying for a separate state are themselves. That sense of dodge and delay marks so much of this Administration. After 70 years, the SNP finally has a majority. Now we need the answers.

I am not surprised that the Scottish National Party has spent almost all the money, considering its pre-election spending spree. The SNP has successfully delayed the bulk of the decisions on public services, using the Christie commission as an excuse.

One would think from listening to the finance secretary that he had already delivered the bulk of that report. When will he abandon his plans for a single police force and bring forward plans for the early intervention revolution that the Christie commission recommends?

Why does the Government want to pass a law that, according to the Law Society of Scotland, “rather than being innovative, in many ways simply restates the law that already exists”?—[Official Report, Justice Committee, 21 June 2011; c 63.]

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00062)

When politicians change their minds, we must welcome their reflection and consideration rather than complain and criticise. I offer my thanks to the First Minister for listening on the Offensive Behaviour at Football and Threatening Communications (Scotland) Bill.

One of the issues that we had with the bill was that we believed that, in the main, the powers already exist to tackle the fundamental problems. We believe in voluntary action, community measures and using existing law before exploring further avenues for legislation. First, I ask the First Minister to request that the Lord Advocate publish an assessment of the use of existing law. Secondly, I ask him to prepare and agree a renewed comprehensive anti-sectarianism strategy to root out this cancer from Scottish society.

I thank the finance secretary for the advance copy of his statement. He says that he views the UK changes as “short-term policy”. Does that not fly in the face of his own independent budget review, which stated that the “projected costs of pensions are an issue of major significance” that dwarfs much of the rest of the budget? The review recommended that the finance secretary should recognise that change is unavoidable and Mr Swinney says that he will not shirk consideration of the case, but was the rest of his statement not just that: full-on shirk?

3. To ask the First Minister what issues will be discussed at the next meeting of the Cabinet. (S4F-00045)

The First Minister’s refusal to withdraw is embarrassing for him, for the Parliament and for Scotland. He is creating a needless division between the Government and our independent justice system. I want to give him another chance—one final chance. Will he withdrew his outrageous remarks against our senior judges and lawyers?

I must say that I am not surprised, because the First Minister has a certain degree of arrogance about these remarks. No First Minister of Scotland should behave in this foolish manner. It is simply outrageous. Instead of attacking judges, is it not high time that he spent his time on something more constructive? For example, if he cannot get the basics right at Cornton Vale, how on earth will he make prisons a place for rehabilitation? If he cannot even provide every prisoner with a bed, how can he expect prisoners to get a route out of crime and to stop them being professional, lifetime offenders? Is it not the case that, after two years of inaction, Scotland’s communities are less safe because his Government will not take seriously the failings at Cornton Vale?

The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth quite rightly says that investment in transport infrastructure is important. He says that we need more, and we agree, which is why Nick Clegg this morning made the announcement to which Mr Swinney referred. However, I am puzzled by the fact that, when savings were made on the new Forth crossing—the bridge that has not been built yet—Mr Swinney did not invest that money in other transport projects, but instead cut the budget by £250 million. Why did he do that?

Obviously, my button-pressing skills have not been honed yet. I should have gone to that training course that the Presiding Officer provided. I am grateful to the Scottish Government for taking on board our suggestions for the motion today. Not least, I am grateful to the Government for recognising that the motion covers the report of this Parliament’s Scotland Bill Committee. It is worth establishing firmly that the Scotland Bill is not the status quo. It contains radical and significant new responsibilities for the Scottish Parliament in relation to taxation. It will change for ever the way in which the Parliament works and will make us responsible for the two sides of the balance sheet. It represents a massive transfer of powers and will give this place greater financial responsibility. That point should not be forgotten. Calman is not the status quo—we are moving on. The Parliament will have greater powers. In all of this, it is important to explain what we want to do with those powers. The Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth will know that our manifesto highlighted how we would use borrowing powers to support the Forth road bridge project. The Deputy Prime Minister is obviously an avid reader of the Business Bulletin and timed his visit to Scotland to make his announcement about borrowing powers to coincide with this debate. I am sure that we are all grateful for the Deputy Prime Minister’s contribution to today’s considerations. It is important to recognise that that is extra money for Scotland’s bridges, roads and railways. It is a clear example of the Liberal Democrats delivering for Scotland in government, perhaps with a little bit of help from the Conservatives. We are making progress and delivering things for Scotland. Now, the new Forth road bridge can be built—I have campaigned for it for some time and I am delighted about that. The crossing will be built without the SNP’s planned cancellation of or delay in other transport projects, so great progress will be made on many projects that are on the SNP’s long list of projects. The cabinet secretary will know—I am sure that he is slightly nervous about it—about the long wish list of his back-bench SNP colleagues, who made many promises for many local transport projects. The puzzle to which I alerted him earlier is that his back benchers made those promises and he has clearly stated the importance of transport infrastructure to regenerating the economy, yet, when he made that point yesterday, he forgot to alert Radio Scotland to the fact that he has cut £250 million from the transport infrastructure projects budget. The SNP has chosen not to prioritise all the projects that back benchers have spoken about throughout the country. When SNP members complain, they try to blame everybody else, but we will now be able to point to where the decision was made. The SNP will no longer be able to blame everybody else in every other part of the country. SNP members have made their choices and will have to live with them—£250 million has been cut from transport infrastructure projects.

Yet again, the SNP blames somebody else. The SNP must accept responsibility for the projects; it has been in government for four years. There is no point in blaming anybody else. The SNP’s cabinet secretary has cut £250 million from transport infrastructure projects. He and his back-bench members will need to explain that decision to their constituents, as it is the SNP’s responsibility. I support the call in the motion for a discussion about the borrowing limits. As John Swinney will recognise, the wholesale collapse in global economies because there was too much debt means that clear limits on borrowing and debt will have to be set. Sometimes, SNP members give the impression that those limits would disappear after they got independence, but I understand that they might expect the Bank of England to run monetary policy, with or without Scottish representation or a Scottish remit, and that the bank’s macroeconomic rules would have to be followed. I have no doubt that the SNP will say that the oil fund could be used, but it has already been spent three times—on pensions, bailing out the Scottish banks and fuel duty.

With their majority, SNP members must realise that they must accept responsibility for the decisions that they make.

3. To ask the First Minister when the Scottish Government will set out its detailed spending plans for this session of the Parliament to allow its commitments to be met. (S4F-00022)

I am interested in what those figures will show for the justice budget. Annabel Goldie is right. I am astonished that a Government minister—and now, apparently, the First Minister—has attacked senior judges in that way. I am surprised that the First Minister has not taken action to seek the withdrawal of those remarks. Was Kenny MacAskill speaking for the whole Government when he said that he would stop the budget for the Supreme Court on the principle that “He who pays the piper ... calls the tune”? Did he seek the First Minister’s approval for that proposal?

It would be helpful if the First Minister answered my question. Is it really the First Minister’s policy to cut funding for the courts that dare to disagree with him? As well as the budget implications, did the First Minister discuss with the Cabinet Secretary for Justice his attack on the judges? That was my question. Let me go over it again. The cabinet secretary called one of the most senior independent judges in Scotland an ambulance chaser. That is not the language of Government ministers; it is the language of the football terraces. Did the First Minister give approval for those tawdry remarks?

That was an excellent maiden speech by Jenny Marra. It was very eloquent and spirited, and I look forward to many more speeches like it. When I see her name up on the board, I will be here to listen to her speeches. I congratulate her on her eloquent remarks. I also look forward to working with John Swinney. This morning, he set a serious tone with his serious remarks. He is obviously a very serious finance secretary with a record, over the past four years, of which he can probably be proud. I welcome the new jobs that were announced this morning. The cabinet secretary was in the fortunate position of being at State Street in Edinburgh to welcome the new jobs that it announced. It is a tribute to the workforce at that company that it has grown so big in so few years. I thank the finance secretary for his remarks about Jeremy Purvis, who is a great loss to the Liberal Democrat group. He was a great parliamentarian and we will miss him. We will engage positively with the cabinet secretary and we will actively support him on many of the steps that he outlined in his speech, especially when they match our priorities of community, opportunity and sustainability. It was reported yesterday that manufacturers have seen the first increase in the availability of credit since the banking crisis, which is welcome, but many small businesses are still not getting the support that they need. I recognise the cabinet secretary’s serious intention to deal with that issue and I hope that he will work with us on some of our ideas and solutions. For instance, we propose the creation of regional development banks, which would bring together colleges, businesses and local councils to get the best from those institutions, and would therefore create local jobs and opportunities. We propose extending broadband to businesses across the country, especially in rural areas, so that they have access to high-speed communications. We also have plans for a home insulation investment programme—

Mr Swinney is very cunning, but I will not fall into his trap. We can work together with the United Kingdom Parliament to achieve so much more for Scotland and the United Kingdom with our existing powers. I am sure that Michael Moore, my colleague at Westminster, will listen to Mr Swinney and his desire to get more powers for this Parliament, but we could do so much more now by working together across the Parliaments. I will be happy to discuss those plans, because we are always open to new ideas and are working to try to get a better Scotland. I have three questions for the cabinet secretary. First, on university funding, we have a shared goal to have an excellent higher education sector in Scotland to train our young people and to compete on the international stage. Does Mr Swinney think that there is sufficient finance for our universities? He said before the election that the funding gap was roughly £93 million, but since then we have heard of cuts—to jobs and to courses—at many universities throughout the country, such as Glasgow, Strathclyde, Stirling and Dundee. Has Mr Swinney revised his plans and will he review whether sufficient finance is available for our universities? We would like to discuss with him our plans to reform the higher education sector, but I would like to know whether he will review the finance that is available for our universities to ensure that they can compete. The second question is on the council tax freeze, which I touched on last week, but we have still not had any answers on how we will pay for the five-year council tax freeze. Our suspicion is that there will be a pay freeze and that, for example, some nurses on modest earnings could lose around £125,000 over the course of their career. I would like to hear from Mr Swinney exactly how he will pay for the five-year promise. The SNP shouted about that big prize during the election, but we have not heard much about the price. The third question is on independence. As we now know that an independence referendum is coming, we would like the cabinet secretary to set out what the costs of independence might be, so that we can have a mature debate about the future of Scotland. For instance, that means working out what would be the cost of having separate diplomatic and foreign policy services, ensuring that we have costs for a separate welfare system and establishing the cost of insurance against a future banking crisis, which could take down the Scottish economy and the public sector. We would like to know the answers to those questions, so that we can have a mature debate in Scotland over the next few years. I was a bit surprised that there was no mention of Professor Joseph Stiglitz in Mr Swinney’s opening remarks. Last October, at the SNP conference, the First Minister said: “Joseph Stiglitz has agreed to advise the Scottish Government on our country’s economic future. A Nobel prize winning economist backing Scotland.” During the most recent budget process, my former colleague Jeremy Purvis, whom I mentioned earlier, asked Mr Swinney whether Professor Stiglitz was involved in the budget process. Mr Swinney said: “Professor Stiglitz has not advised on the detail of the budget, but I have seen material that leads me to suspect that he would approve”.—[Official Report, Finance Committee, 14 December 2010; c 2887.] I think that that means that Mr Swinney has read his book. I would like to know whether Professor Stiglitz has been involved in the current process. Why did we not hear from Professor Stiglitz before we had this debate, so that we could have the benefit of the words of wisdom of that great man?

I, too, thank the First Minister for giving me early sight of his statement this morning. I pay tribute to former colleagues who were not elected. Their hard work and effort on behalf of their constituents ended suddenly, and often with little ceremony. Many of the new SNP MSPs who were elected in their place have been generous in their recognition of that hard work. Some of the members who lost their seats served for more than 12 years. I thank them for that effort. I also pay tribute to David Cairns, who is a greatly respected man who will be deeply missed in Scottish politics. He served Scotland well, and I am proud to have had the chance to work with him. As I said last week, this time people in Scotland have chosen not to equip us with strong Liberal numbers in Parliament. Those of us who remain will have to be strong Liberal voices to hold the Government to account. During the election, the SNP urged voters to “secure three prizes for Scotland”— prizes, we were told, on health, the police and council tax. However, last week, in the First Minister’s acceptance speech, those prizes were nowhere to be seen. There was not one mention of his five-year council tax freeze, which was on the lips of every candidate and on every leaflet before polling day, but about which the SNP went strangely quiet afterwards. Instead, last week we were treated to a long list of points on every other tax that there is. It sounded more like extracts from the manual of an institute of taxation practitioners than a programme for government. Today, council tax is relegated to page 8 of the First Minister’s statement, and there is not much more information on the freeze.

No. I do not have time. At the statement’s heart, there is no explanation of how a Scottish Government can make a five-year promise on the back of two years of figures. However, on the radio this morning, we heard more: we heard the price of that prize. The deep suspicion is that a five-year council tax freeze will be at the price of a five-year pay freeze, which will cost public sector staff on modest wages very dearly. A nurse on an average salary will lose £2,500 as a result, which will never be made up. For a 25-year-old, that will mean that they will lose £125,000 over their career. Those are serious sums that need serious answers. People will want the answers about their future. The people in Kelty who voted SNP did so because they heard the shouts about the three big prizes, not the whispers about the price to be paid. Their votes have been counted, and that is what they appear to have signed up to. They have not, however; the First Minister has saved them the trouble and has signed both sides of the social contract for himself, on their behalf. We need to hear what the Scottish Government intends to do to measure the investment in Scotland’s universities, so as to ensure that they do not fall behind other institutions in the rest of the UK and around the world. We also need to know when the First Minister expects to start his preparations for the local income tax. As regards the long and growing list of new powers that the First Minister wants, it is only fair for him to set out for us the full list of things for which he is claiming his mandate. At its heart, the SNP’s revised set of claims for a revised mandate is absurd. The SNP is solemnly promising to spend the first two years of the session working on the Scotland Bill, and it confidently expects to spend the last two years abolishing it. How absurd is that? When the First Minister was renominated last week, I said that we would work with his Government where we agree with it. On supporting business and creating jobs, we will be united; on protecting the local services on which we all rely, he will have our full support; and on restoring excellence in education, we will be with him every step of the way. I look forward to discussing the Scottish futures fund, which is contained in both our parties’ manifestos. It places a priority on early intervention, on opportunities for young people and on the digital economy. I hope to persuade the First Minister to go further and to support our approach on science and green energy, too—the sort of sensible and sustainable investment that is needed to rebuild our economy, to strengthen our society and to shape a successful future. I am pleased to follow in the footsteps of Tavish Scott in leading my party. He set a direction that put us firmly on the side of people who want to get up and get on, creating businesses and wealth, supporting young people in education and keeping people in charge of local services. I am pleased also to follow in the footsteps of that great man Jo Grimond “towards the sound of gunfire.”

I, too, congratulate the ministerial team on its appointment. This is an exciting moment and an exciting time ahead for the new ministers, particularly those entering Government for the first time. I wish them well. Majority government is a huge responsibility. As the size of the ministerial team increases, so do our expectations of what it can achieve. I am sure that members of the new team will not take that responsibility lightly. They are answerable to the people of Scotland for the promises made during the election. Unlike last time, as a majority Government, the SNP will find that it has nowhere to hide. The SNP will be judged on how it uses its majority—and how it does not. As we have heard this morning, the Opposition parties in this place will work with the SNP on its positive promises to make sure that they are kept. I hope that ministers will agree to engage with us so that, where possible, we can agree a joint approach on the many areas in which disagreement might be over detail rather than ambition. My fear, however, is that the First Minister will not choose to use his enlarged team wisely; that instead of the focus on jobs, on growing the economy and on excellence in education and public services there will be a focus on breaking up Britain; and that what we see before us this morning is Alex Salmond’s new independence army. However, the First Minister’s loyal foot soldiers have a choice: services over separation; picking up the economy, not picking fights with Westminster; and putting the needs of Scotland before their party-political agenda. During the election, we heard from the Scottish National Party many welcome promises on health, education, justice and more; last week in the First Minister’s speech, we heard not one single mention of them. I hope that his new team will not make the same mistake.

Thank you, Madam Presiding Officer. I congratulate the First Minister on his re-election. I did not expect those to be the first words that I would speak in this chamber—and I am sure that, at some points in the past, the First Minister might not have expected to hear them. However, I congratulate him on his achievement, on the way in which he conducted the campaign, on the way in which he framed the election debate and on the result that he achieved. This time, the people of Scotland have chosen not to have strong Liberal numbers in the Parliament. That makes it even more important to have strong liberal voices. It is important that public life is not dominated by the forces of nationalism or conservatism, in this country or anywhere else. The First Minister has won a majority. He will be marked and judged by how he uses it. He now faces serious questions, and people will seek clarity on what exactly he is claiming a mandate for. If his majority becomes a bulldozer for nationalism, we will do what we can to oppose him, inside this chamber and outside its walls. When he commits—as he has done this morning—to a positive future for Scotland; when his Government supports business and a growing, sustainable economy and society; when he makes a reality of our shared ideas for investment in Scotland’s future through early intervention and excellent education; and if he can be tempted away from the path of centralisation and control, we will gladly work with him. I wish him well. [Applause.]