9. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to increase the number of foster families. (S4O-02895)

According to the Fostering Network, at least 850 foster families are needed in Scotland. Fife Council has a target of approving 60 new foster care placements by September 2015. What additional support measures is the Government considering to ensure that every child is provided with a suitable family?

I begin by thanking the committee clerking team for their hard work and their efforts in helping us put together the report. I also thank the numerous organisations, individuals and public bodies involved in the committee’s inquiry into child sexual exploitation in Scotland. The contributions and evidence they provided have proved invaluable and have allowed the committee to conduct what I believe is an in-depth examination of the current measures in place to prevent and tackle the sexual exploitation of children in Scotland. I extend particular gratitude to Barnardo’s Scotland, which submitted the public petition that provided the impetus for our inquiry. Its engagement with the committee has been crucial, and I commend it for raising such an important issue with the Scottish Parliament. The sexual exploitation of children has become a more prominent issue in recent years, largely due to extensive media coverage of child exploitation gangs in various parts of the UK. That has instigated a greater focus on the issue in Scotland, but more must be done to improve the ability of services to identify victims and potential victims of child sexual exploitation, to support those children and to target the predators. The committee’s report makes it clear that data collection on the prevalence of child sexual exploitation in Scotland is inconsistent and underresourced and that there is a need for improved data collection tools. However, from the information that is available, I was shocked to learn that many of the estimates of prevalence are relatively high. For example, according to case study research undertaken by the centre for excellence for looked-after children in Scotland, around one in four children in care is a victim of child sexual exploitation, and that figure is expected to be considerably higher for some of the most vulnerable groups. That alone indicates that we have much to learn as a nation about how to tackle this despicable crime. One of the areas on which I would like to focus is the need for more widespread and comprehensive preventive education among young people. In today’s society, children are increasingly socialised into believing certain negative stereotypes about boys and girls and about what is normal behaviour in terms of sexual relationships. We need to address such attitudes at an early stage to reduce the risk of children thinking that it is normal or acceptable for anyone to coerce them into engaging in sexual behaviour. Although there are already some examples of good practice in schools of educating children about healthy relationships, mutual respect and sexual boundaries, the committee found that there is a need to expand such practices much more widely in educational institutions and other youth settings across Scotland. The committee has been made aware of some excellent educational resources, such as those produced by Barnardo’s Scotland, that are already freely available. Many of them can be readily accessed via the website of the NWG Network—the national working group for sexually exploited children and young people. Another aspect of the report that I would like to highlight is the lack of therapeutic and emotional support services available consistently throughout Scotland for young people affected by sexual exploitation. The committee found, throughout the course of our inquiry, that many young people feel that they have no one they can trust to confide in. It appears that there is often a general mistrust of social care workers among victims, due to a fear of being judged and labelled, which may be down to a lack of training and awareness in the sector. We need to break down those barriers or at least ensure the availability of alternative services such as ChildLine, which can offer valuable support when children feel that they have nowhere else to turn. Connected to that issue is the provision of refuges for those who have broken free from child sexual exploitation and need a temporary base while they make contact with the services that can help them. The committee was informed that Scotland’s only such refuge for under-16s—run by Aberlour in the Glasgow area—closed in June 2013 and that there has been no facility in place since. The availability of a safe place to go might significantly increase the likelihood of victims to seek help and might also play a key role in preventing the re-entry of children into sexual exploitation circles. I therefore strongly support the committee’s recommendation that consideration should be given to placing a duty on all local authorities to provide suitable refuges for the victims of child sexual exploitation. The final matter I would like to address is the role of the third sector in preventing and tackling child sexual exploitation. Throughout the course of our inquiry, it has become overwhelmingly clear that charities and voluntary organisations make a significant contribution in this area. I believe that more must be done to acknowledge that and to support those organisations to continue the work that they do. Time and again, we have heard evidence that suggests that, without the support of organisations such as Barnardo’s, Eighteen and Under, Who Cares? Scotland and many others, victims of child sexual exploitation would not have been able to break free from abuse. Third sector organisations appear to have an enhanced ability to build trust with young people who as a result become more likely to engage with other support services. We should use the expertise and experience of the third sector to co-ordinate our efforts to tackle child sexual exploitation at a national level. In that context, a major element is the need to improve the sharing of intelligence about alleged perpetrators between police and the third sector. Third-sector organisations seem to have a distinct advantage in that regard, due to their capacity to gain victims’ trust. Good examples of such practice include the partnership between Barnardo’s Scotland and police in Renfrewshire, and the multi-agency approach that Glasgow child protection committee has adopted. If we can develop co-ordination with the third sector across the board, it seems likely that we will see significant benefits in outcomes for children and in the identification of offenders and the rate of prosecution. I am a member of the Public Petitions Committee, and my experience of the inquiry has been both harrowing and rewarding. Although it was very upsetting to hear evidence of young people who have been subjected to sexual exploitation in Scotland, I have been reassured that good work is being done up and down the country to help to protect vulnerable children. It is clear from our investigation that more needs to be done to co-ordinate the actions of all the agencies that are involved: on data collection, preventative education, training for people in the care industry, the provision of therapeutic services for young people, and law enforcement. I therefore support the committee’s recommendation that the Scottish Government develop a national strategy for tackling child sexual exploitation. If that happens, I am positive that we can improve the services that we provide nationally, to ensure that every child, regardless of where they live in Scotland, has equal access to the support that they need if they are to avoid becoming a victim of child sexual exploitation, as well as the support that they would need to deal with the consequences of becoming a victim. I again thank everyone who was involved in the committee’s inquiry, and I ask members to join me in commending the report to the Scottish Government.

I welcome to the Parliament today Debbie Duncan, a worker from the teen parent project in Kirkcaldy, Kathryn Miller of Fife Gingerbread, and Susanne Fraser-Kerr of Barnardo’s. As many members may be aware, my constituency has one of the highest teenage pregnancy rates in Europe. I am therefore keen to raise awareness of the issue and to highlight the excellent work that is done by Fife Gingerbread through initiatives such as the teen parent project, which provides support to young lone parents and helps them to cope with many of the problems that they face daily. Evidence shows that young teenage mothers are less likely to complete their education or to seek further educational opportunities, and that teenage mothers are less likely to be employed and more likely to be in receipt of some form of income-based benefits or employed in low-paid jobs. Consequently, poverty is a major factor in teenage parenting. Indeed, data collected demonstrates that, statistically, there is a relationship between deprivation and teenage pregnancy; it indicates that young women under the age of 16 who live in Scotland’s most deprived areas are more likely to experience teenage pregnancy than those who live in the more affluent areas. According to the 2012 Scottish index of multiple deprivation, the most educationally deprived data zone in Fife is to be found in the intermediate zone of Kirkcaldy and comprises the areas of Hayfield and Smeaton. It is ranked 27th, which places it among the top 5 per cent of the most educationally deprived areas in Scotland. According to the index, the most health-deprived zone in Fife is in the intermediate zone of Methil East. Both those zones lie in my constituency. It is clear that, although other factors must be considered when looking at teenage pregnancies, deprivation plays a significant role and often brings with it low self-esteem. Fife Gingerbread is to be congratulated on its co-ordinated initiatives to address the issues that teenage mothers face. Fife Gingerbread’s teen parent project provides one-to-one support to teenage parents in conjunction with group work and peer support. The project was originally developed in response to specific issues that face young parents in the Levenmouth area. Following the success of the initial pilot in Levenmouth, the project was launched in Kirkcaldy in partnership with the YMCA and with support from NHS Fife and other voluntary sector groups. Operationally, a dedicated teen parent liaison worker works in partnership with health and education agencies and with wider voluntary and statutory partners. The aims are to support teenage parents in establishing good parenting skills and developing support networks and to promote engagement with other services. Partnership working includes mellow babies, which runs in partnership with Barnardo’s; mellow bumps, which works in partnership with James and Harriet from Mellow Parenting; and a project that was introduced specifically for young fathers, in partnership with the Cottage Family Centre. The first mellow bumps programme started in October 2013 with referrals from the family health midwifery team, the family nurse partnership and health visitors. The Mellow Parenting programmes are in line with Scottish Government objectives. Figures from the teen parent project’s progress report of February 2013 show that 264 young mothers have been supported in the Levenmouth and Kirkcaldy areas, that 52 young fathers have been supported and that 292 children have benefited. Many of the clients were also referred to one or more additional services, such as Barnardo’s, the Cottage Family Centre, Home-Start and the jobcentre. Statistics that are based on an evaluation of the Kirkcaldy teen parent project that used the Rosenberg self-esteem scale evidenced an increase in the self-esteem of teen mothers. An evaluation of the Kirkcaldy and Levenmouth teen parent project that used the Warwick-Edinburgh mental wellbeing scale also evidenced an increase in the mental health and wellbeing of teen mothers. An evaluation of the Kirkcaldy teen parent project that used the tool to measure parenting self-efficacy evidenced an increase in the parenting skills and confidence of teen mothers. The excellent work that is carried out in the Kirkcaldy area was recognised in the UK’s biggest parenting competition, in which the Kirkcaldy teen parent project was named as one of the best in the east of Scotland. The Linktown young parent group—which is based in an area of Kirkcaldy that I know well, having served as a councillor there for many years—was presented with a winner’s certificate and a gold listing at the Netmums awards. Local mums and dads praised Kirkcaldy teen parent project and called it the highlight of their week. Parents stated that what makes the group special to them is the caring staff, the great range of activities on offer for kids and the fact that it puts a smile on the face of everyone who attends. I have been privileged to witness at first hand some of the work that is done by Fife Gingerbread and the teen parent project. I attended a Fife Gingerbread annual general meeting at which single parents highlighted the difficulties that they face daily. One speaker, who was nervous on that day, is now a project worker for Kirkcaldy teen parent project and is in the gallery this evening. Recently, I was invited to Fife Gingerbread’s Hallowe’en party, where I was in my element in participating in the activities, including the singalong at the end, which I thoroughly enjoyed—although I am not sure that everyone else enjoyed my singing. Overall, parents and children alike had a fabulous time. It was a delight to see how energetic and enthusiastic Debbie Duncan was in organising and participating in all that afternoon’s activities. Just before Christmas, when I was doing some last-minute shopping at Asda, I bumped into Debbie. She was shopping, but not for herself—she was looking for vegetables to enable her to make home-made soup for her group in the Linktown area, many of whom were going without in order to get presents for their children. She was ensuring that they would have something to eat on the day. That is just a small example of the commitment and dedication that she and Fife Gingerbread staff give to their projects and it shows their willingness to go the extra mile to provide the best possible services to parents and their children. The teen parent project will aim to deliver programmes that provide specific support, while simultaneously raising awareness of issues such as welfare reform. The impact of recent welfare reforms has presented challenges to many vulnerable sectors of society, but none more so than single parents. Single parents now find themselves with even greater stress and worry as they are mandatorily transitioned from one benefit to another. They are getting increasingly more anxious and concerned about how reform will impact on their day-to-day living in providing for their children. Fife Gingerbread is delivering an initiative entitled “Pimp my purse”; I love that title, which makes me smile every time I read it. The initiative involves holding workshops in partnership with Citizens Advice and Rights Fife and credit unions. The Kirkcaldy project has recently been recognised for its achievements thus far and has received a substantial grant from the Big Lottery Fund’s young start initiative, which will enable Kirkcaldy teen parent project to continue to deliver highly valued services in the area. Rhona and all her staff at Fife Gingerbread are delivering a service in my constituency that is greatly needed. It is tailored and delivered to the needs of teenage parents with an enthusiasm and passion that has had a positive and invaluable impact on all those taking part. I wish Fife Gingerbread and its teen parent project every success in the future. I know that it will continue to make a huge difference in some of the most deprived areas of my constituency and I sincerely hope that those initiatives will be able to continue to support young teenage mums for many years to come.

I thank James Dornan for bringing to the chamber the motion to congratulate St Andrew’s First Aid on its count me in campaign. As a lifelong scout, I know the importance of the phrase, “Be prepared.” That simple motto can serve as a life lesson for us all—to be prepared for good times, victories and triumphs, but also to be prepared for defeat, sickness and injury. In times of personal injury—of any sort—being prepared can mean the difference between life and death. When a household accident occurs, many Scots’ first instinct is to call 999, as it should be in the event of a true emergency. However, it is important to know the difference between what is and is not an emergency. Every year, 34,000 Scots are admitted to hospitals after falls, choking, burns and other common accidents. Although they can result in serious injuries, many such cases could have been sorted out or received initial care with basic first aid. Those 34,000 patients are being treated instead of the victims of more serious accidents or medical conditions. Unfortunately, most Scots just do not know that many accidents are treatable at home, in part because only 23 per cent of Scots are trained in basic first aid procedures. If awareness is raised of the importance and value of first aid training, Scots can become more self-reliant and can take a serious burden off hospitals. That is where St Andrew’s First Aid comes in. In the lead-up to first aid week, St Andrew’s First Aid has launched its count me in campaign, which, according to the organisation’s website, “is aimed at building awareness that First Aid saves lives.” The centrepiece of the campaign is: “No one should die because they needed First Aid and didn’t get it.” In its pursuit of that goal, St Andrew’s First Aid is seeking 34,000 signatures—one for each of the Scots who are admitted to hospital each year for common injuries that require emergency attention, but who could have initially received first aid assistance. Furthermore, the campaign seeks to educate the 77 per cent of Scots who are not trained in basic first aid procedures on how crucial it is to learn such skills. As the leading provider of work-related first aid training in Scotland, St Andrew’s First Aid provides a wide variety of services that relate to first aid accreditation. It has a series of downloadable materials for small business owners, hospitality managers, employees and other members of any business to help guide people towards enrolment in first aid training. St Andrew’s First Aid is particularly concerned with the Scottish hospitality industry, in which last year more than 500 workers received an injury that kept them off work for at least three days. In restaurants alone, 205 cooking and serving-related accidents were recorded last year. One in 10 Scots say that they have witnessed a medical emergency in a hotel, restaurant or other entertainment venue, and one in 16 have needed medical assistance for injuries that they themselves have sustained. St Andrew’s First Aid seeks to create a more resilient Scotland—one in which hospitality workers and people in their homes do not have to fear for their safety in the event of an accident and do not unnecessarily burden the emergency medical services. I know first hand the importance of first aid training. As a scout leader and a lifelong scout, I teach my scouts to be prepared for anything. I have been first aid certified since I was 18 years old, and I often help young scouts to acquire their first aid badges. When we go on camping trips in the summer, it is important to have someone who can respond to such unfortunate situations. I am proud to be one of the few who can, but I wish that it were not such an exclusive group. I urge Scots everywhere to get first aid certified. As someone who has experienced the positive benefits of first aid training up close in various situations in which I have had to take action to help my family and friends, I can assure members that it is worth the time that it takes to do. I congratulate St Andrew’s First Aid on its efforts in its everyday work and its count me in campaign, and I hope that the organisation knows that I am a huge supporter of its work.

I thank Richard Lyle for bringing to the chamber the motion to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the assassination of American President John F Kennedy. I was only two years old when President Kennedy was assassinated. I do not remember the feeling in the air after it happened. I do not remember the powerful reaction of the whole world to that earth-shattering moment. I do not even remember how upset my parents and other family must have felt afterwards. However, we do not have to be able to remember that day to understand the profound impact that President Kennedy had on our world. JFK’s numerous achievements on the domestic and international stages created an image of a man who deserves our utmost respect. One can only imagine how different our world would be if his life had not been cruelly cut short. JFK had a vision for peace and prosperity the world over. He loved his country and cared deeply and passionately about civil rights, economic prosperity and scientific innovation through space exploration. However, given the nature of the times, much of his focus was on world politics and, in particular, on relations with the Soviet Union. A reminder of JFK’s humanity is that his presidency experienced many highs and many lows. One of his lows was the failed Bay of Pigs invasion near the beginning of his presidency in 1961. The attack had been largely planned before he took office, so he was briefed after being elected and he approved the plan without having much time to think about it before the invasion was launched. From that experience, Kennedy learned that he would have to develop a better strategy for US and Soviet relations than rushing into armed conflict. The desire to avoid superpower skirmishes helped JFK to bring the world back from the brink of nuclear war in 1962, during the Cuban missile crisis. He had been involved in that conflict from the beginning. He was able to remain calm, even while the world was preparing to duck and cover and when an American plane was shot down, killing the pilot. The achievement of a resolution through direct negotiation with the USSR reinforced his view that reconciliation was achievable. Kennedy’s new views were on display in his commencement address on 10 June 1963 at the American University in Washington DC, which was also 50 years ago this year. He said: “I have, therefore, chosen this time and place to discuss a topic on which ignorance too often abounds and the truth is too rarely perceived. And that is the most important topic on earth: peace ... not merely peace in our time, but peace in all time.” He went on to announce his willingness to negotiate with the Soviets “toward early agreement on a comprehensive test ban treaty”, which resulted in the nuclear test ban treaty later that year. He also declared that he would not conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere as long as other states refrained from testing there as well. As he said, that was an attempt “to make clear our good faith and solemn convictions on this matter.” That speech signalled the climax of a dramatic growth in President Kennedy’s character over his short, incomplete presidency, and it showed his aspirations for world peace, which we could all stand to take some time to refocus on. I would like to take a moment to share with members an excerpt from one of President Kennedy’s final speeches. On 13 November 1963—only days before he was assassinated—the Scottish Black Watch band performed for him and more than 1,000 guests on the White House south lawn during its American tour. JFK shared with the gathered crowd these words on the importance of American and Scottish connections. He said: “We’re proud to have them here because they are a Scottish regiment, and that green and misty country has sent hundreds of thousands of Scottish men and women to the United States, and they have been among our finest citizens. And we’re proud to have them here, because, speaking personally, the history of Scotland captured me at a very young age. The United States, and in fact all of us, love, I suppose, lost causes, and on occasion the history of Scotland has been a lost cause, but in some ways they have triumphed—perhaps more today than ever before.” It is no surprise to me that Richard Lyle felt compelled to lodge this motion on the 50th anniversary of JFK’s assassination, and I thank him again for it. President Kennedy felt a deep connection to our great country, just as many of us felt a deep connection to him and his unparalleled leadership. Let us take this anniversary of his death to reflect on the many leadership lessons that we can learn from him and to renew our faith in our cause and our country, as he would have us do.

I thank Colin Keir for bringing to the chamber the motion to celebrate 100 years of conservation, research and education at Edinburgh zoo. Edinburgh zoo has much to be proud of and its centenary is only one of its many accomplishments. I am proud to rise today in support of the motion to honour 100 years of conservation, research and education at the zoo because of how important its work is to conservation efforts in Scotland and around the world. When the zoo was opened in 1913 by the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland’s founder, Thomas Gillespie, the RZSS was only four years old, but the zoo’s reputation and prestige grew over time to make it a prime tourist destination for Edinburgh and Scotland. In addition to being the only zoological park in the United Kingdom to have a royal charter, Edinburgh zoo prides itself on its size, popularity and leadership in the conservation community. Furthermore, the RZSS uses the zoo’s centre of conservation for threatened domestic and international species as a platform for its various wildlife protection programmes. One of those programmes is the Pantanal conservation and research initiative, which focuses on preserving the Pantanal wetlands, the world’s largest freshwater wetlands, which are located in Brazil and parts of Bolivia. The zoo attaches importance to that project due to the rich biodiversity that is threatened by development programmes and changes in land management practices. However, the lessons learnt in conservation practices from the Pantanal wetlands are not isolated to that ecosystem—in fact, they are principles of wildlife preservation internationally. Of course, the most popular venture by the RZSS is the China-UK giant panda project—a partnership with the Wolong panda breeding centre in Sichuan province, China, with the goal of reintroducing pandas into the wild. In the collective efforts to preserve, protect and rebuild panda habitats in the area, the RZSS remains active in Sichuan province following the 8.0 magnitude earthquake that hit the area in 2008. In return, China has loaned two giant pandas to the UK—one of only three pairs in all of Europe—which the RZSS can study and research, all with the goal of protecting this wildly endangered species. The project is particularly popular among the 600,000 annual visitors to Edinburgh zoo who flock to see the increasingly rare giant pandas. Although the RZSS focuses its conservation efforts abroad, it is also concerned with wildlife preservation here in Scotland. One significant project is the Cairngorms wildcat project, which runs in partnership with the RZSS and several other Scottish organisations and seeks to protect and preserve the Scottish wildcat. The Scottish wildcat, which is often called the Highland tiger, is an endangered species for a variety of reasons. Interactions with domestic and feral cats have been devastating to the Scottish wildcat. Activities that are occurring as part of the project include increasing the number of vaccinations and neuterings that are being performed in areas surrounding the Cairngorms national park and working with land managers to ensure that predator control is wildcat friendly. The RZSS’s Scottish beaver trial programme is another conservation effort that is being housed at Edinburgh zoo. The project’s aim is to decide whether beavers should be reintroduced into Scotland since being hunted to extinction in the 16th century. Beavers are a keystone species, which means that their presence is an indicator of other kinds of life in their environment. Because of their feeding and damming practices, they are able to create ponds and wetlands that attract other species, develop biodiversity and even improve water quality. However, reintroducing beavers without properly monitoring the process could also be harmful to the environment, so it is important to study the issue carefully. In order to be closer to wildcats, beavers and many other species of animal that roam the Scottish Highlands, the RZSS opened the Highland wildlife park at Kingussie, right in the middle of the Cairngorm national park. The Highland wildlife park serves as a tourist destination for Highland visitors and an educational institution for schoolchildren of all ages. Lessons range from tours for pre-schoolers to research days and full-on lectures for secondary school pupils and older. Through various hands-on workshops, such as its touch-and-feel session with the skins and skulls of animals, the park works with students who have assisted learning needs. The Highland wildlife park’s emphasis on education is a testament to the mission of the RZSS, which is: “To inspire and excite our visitors with the wonder of living animals, and so to promote the conservation of threatened species and habitats.” Edinburgh zoo and the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland have a lot to be proud of. From research and education initiatives to active engagement in worldwide conservation efforts, it is impossible not to see the RZSS’s impact in the past century. Happy birthday to Edinburgh zoo and here’s to the next 100 years.

I thank Mike MacKenzie for bringing the debate to the chamber. I am proud to join my colleagues today in congratulating the 12 winners of the 2013 Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland awards. All the winning buildings are testament to Scottish ability and raw creative talent, in addition to the skills of the various international partners involved. I wish everyone who is involved the best of luck in tonight’s awards ceremony and congratulate them on their accomplishments. Following the announcement of those awards, I was especially proud of my fellow Fifers when I saw that the new Dunfermline high school was recognised as an award winner not only by RIAS, but by Zero Waste Scotland in the special category for resource efficiency. After the years of hard work and planning that have gone into the construction of the new Dunfermline high school building, Fife Council property and education services and everyone involved from the school and elsewhere should be proud of their collective accomplishment. Opened in August 2012, the school is the flagship project of Fife Council’s building Fife’s future programme, which has invested £126 million in new schools around Fife. That investment has included a new secondary school for Kirkcaldy and the provision of £40 million for Dunfermline high school. The programme is designed to build state-of-the-art schools that are highly adaptable, functional and sustainable places of learning fit for the 21st century and beyond. Sustainable design was a key part of the plan for Dunfermline high school and accounts for its selection for the Zero Waste Scotland award. The building Fife’s future programme set targets for the school from the outset and ultimately managed to achieve a Building Research Establishment environmental assessment method “excellent” rating and an energy performance certificate rating of A for the building. That was done through passive design measures in ventilation and natural lighting, as well as advanced recycling and renewable energy systems, such as rainwater collection and the installation of solar panels. The initial construction process focused on resource efficiency, and subcontractors were encouraged to come up with innovative waste reduction ideas. For example, 100 per cent of excavated soil was reused, saving £60,000 and minimising the environmental impact of transporting the soil to landfill and leaving it there. Further, 94 per cent of subcontractors were based within 50 miles of the school, meaning that Fife businesses were supported and less carbon was spent by transportation. More important, the building is a testament to what architecture should be all about—a building should be for the people who use it every day. The beauty of the building is that it achieves those things, while being exactly what the school needs. School administrators, teachers and pupils were all involved in the design process from the beginning. That can be seen in the widespread use of natural lighting, flexible learning areas and open spaces in the building, all of which were pupil requests. The open spaces and excellent overall visibility in the building also contribute to the see and be seen approach to building design, promoted by school administrators, which is proven to cut down on bullying by creating fewer corners for bullies to lurk in. As an educational institution, the new Dunfermline high school is top of the line. It is designed to accommodate 1,800 pupils. The building is equipped with a large assembly hall with tiered seating, a modern library complete with resources centre, approximately 1,200 computers or laptops and full wireless technology. The new school’s infrastructure is designed to support student life inside and outside the classroom, as the school includes a drama studio with rehearsal rooms, a dance studio, a sports hall, a fitness suite, two gymnasiums and extensive playing fields, including a large Astroturf pitch. Finally, the cafeteria, coffee bar and colourful, glazed three-storey wall all help to create relaxing communal areas, which make the school feel more alive than institutional. Since 1468, Dunfermline high school has been an educational hub for Dunfermline and Fife. In August 2012, the school began a new chapter of educational excellence. Thanks to the excellent investment strategy of Fife Council through the building Fife’s future programme and the outstanding abilities of BAM Construction, the young people of Dunfermline have been blessed with a remarkable school for generations to come. It is for those and many other reasons that Dunfermline high school has most deservingly won a RIAS award and a Zero Waste Scotland award in the special category for resource efficiency. All 12 RIAS award winners have similar stories of improving the lives of everyday Scots, for example through investment in community centres, schools and theatres throughout Scotland. I commend RIAS for recognising those accomplishments and look forward to finding out who the winner of the Andrew Doolan best building in Scotland award will be tonight.

6. To ask the Scottish Government what recent measures NHS Fife has put in place to improve the accident and emergency department at Victoria hospital. (S4O-02537)

What steps does the Scottish Government intend to take to ensure that the extra resources given to the accident and emergency department at Victoria hospital have a positive impact on helping to reduce waiting times and, in the long term, offer a higher and more effective level of care to the public?

6. To ask the Scottish Government how it plans to make rail travel more attractive under the 2014 rail franchise renewal. (S4O-02427)

Scotland’s beautiful landscapes and scenery are attractive to cyclists. However, finding space on the train to get there is often difficult. Some of our commuter routes are particularly busy and passengers have to stand. Elsewhere, similar issues are solved by having flexible sections for bikes, wheelchairs and buggies or fold-down seats, and running extra or double-decker trains. What can the operating companies offer to address the problems here?

I apologise to Jim Eadie and the other members in the chamber that I will not be able to stay for the remainder of the speeches due to another engagement. I, too, thank Jim Eadie for bringing the motion to the chamber tonight. I am proud to join my colleagues in congratulating the University of Edinburgh on climbing to number 17 in the QS World University Rankings. That is a fantastic achievement for the university and it goes some way towards recognising the exceptional quality of its teaching and research activities. It also highlights Scotland’s well-deserved place in the world as a leading centre for education. The University of Edinburgh is one of Scotland’s ancient educational institutions. Founded in 1583 following the granting of a royal charter by James VI, it has provided Scotland with more than 400 years of exemplary standards in education. In the early 18th century, during the age of enlightenment, the city of Edinburgh became known as a major intellectual centre, thanks to its outstanding university, which of course was central in Scotland’s enlightenment. Over the years, many esteemed scholars and academics have walked through the university’s doors. Its impressive collection of alumni includes a plethora of famous names, such as Charles Darwin, David Hume, Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, Alexander Graham Bell and Sir Walter Scott—to name but a few. Today the university is home to an impressive array of leading international researchers, who provide a first-class standard of teaching to their many students. The school of medicine is particularly renowned and was ranked first in the United Kingdom in the most recent research assessment exercise results. The university has also been praised for its excellence in veterinary medicine, linguistics, art, chemistry and mathematics. The university is at the forefront of research and development in, for example, the life sciences and renewable energy. Support for universities is therefore key to Scotland’s future. That is why the Scottish Government invests more than £1 billion a year in higher education and has allocated an additional £13.8 million directly to fund research at our universities. By investing in our world-leading facilities, we are building the foundations of a better and more secure Scotland for years to come. The University of Edinburgh plays a major role in that regard and it is essential that we provide the necessary support to ensure that it continues to do so. Its ranking as one of the world’s top 20 universities will not only enhance Scotland’s status on the international stage but help the university to attract more of the most talented and ambitious students from all over the globe. Edinburgh receives a high volume of international applicants, but I am proud that more than 40 per cent of the undergraduates that it welcomes come from Scotland and that a further 29 per cent come from the rest of the UK. It is significant that 74 per cent of undergraduates come from state schools and colleges, which provides some assurance that the university, despite its prestige and international standing, remains accessible to local students from all backgrounds. The University of Edinburgh provides jobs and prospects to thousands of citizens and plays an important role in fuelling our economy. Through its research and innovation programme, it promotes entrepreneurship and supports the creation of new businesses. In 2012-13 the university helped to create 35 new companies—it has consistently created new companies over the past four years. That is a major contribution to the Scottish economy, and I am grateful to the university for continuing to devote resources to such an important part of its work. It is clear that the university offers Scotland a great deal. I cannot thank and praise its staff and students enough for their efforts in helping their university to achieve such a prestigious accolade in the QS World University Rankings. I am an incredibly proud Scot and I think that we can take much pride in our country, including in our reputation for quality education and research—thanks, in no small part, to the University of Edinburgh. I am sure that members will join me in congratulating the university again on its remarkable achievement.

15. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made regarding the regionalisation of Adam Smith College and Carnegie College. (S4O-02306)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that, following an investigation into Adam Smith College, the recent report by Her Majesty’s inspectors, which was produced on behalf of the Scottish Further and Higher Education Funding Council, was excellent, considering the amount of uncertainty that staff and students have been subjected to over the past 16 months? Does he also agree that that is testament to the commitment and dedication of the college’s staff?

4. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to promote integrated ticketing and the multimodal use of public transport. (S4O-02265)

Integrated ticketing and easy access to multimodal use of public transport significantly increase the attractiveness of public transport while further contributing to a low-carbon economy. How are integrated ticketing and multimodal use of public transport being considered in current and future transport and urban infrastructure projects?

I am delighted to speak about Scottish sporting success and the Scottish Government’s aspirations for the nation's sporting future. With the Commonwealth games and the Ryder cup due to arrive in Scotland in 2014, the issue of sport and of achieving a sporting legacy is of particular importance. It is widely hoped that those elite sporting events will inspire and encourage Scotland’s youth to participate in a variety of sporting activities, thus raising social capital and benefiting communities and society as a whole. In a bid to highlight the potential for greater sporting participation, the Scottish Government has initiated measures that seek to attract youths from all socioeconomic backgrounds to sports and physical activities that they might not otherwise have considered. The Scottish Government is developing the youth sport strategy, which is designed to encourage young people to partake in physical exercise by making sport accessible and enjoyable. The young people’s sport panel is to be a key contributor to that youth sport strategy. The panel comprises 16 young people and is formed through a partnership between sportscotland and Young Scot. It has two principal objectives: to influence and shape the future of sport in Scotland and to raise its profile. The panel hopes to harness current sporting excitement to motivate and encourage young Scots to participate by highlighting existing opportunities to those who may be unaware of the diverse sporting activities available to them. Further, the Scottish Government is a champion of physical education in schools and has demonstrated its commitment to youth sport and fitness through two core initiatives. The pre-school children’s play strategy is in development, and the Scottish Government initiated the go2play scheme in 2012. For children of primary and secondary school age, the Scottish Government aims to increase the frequency of physical education lessons to approximately two hours per academic week. It supports the implementation of that initiative with £5.8 million of funding over 2012-13 and 2013-14. In a bid to maximise youth potential, more than 900 pupils from throughout Scotland are to participate in the youth volunteering and leadership programme lead 2014. That programme, delivered through collaboration between the Youth Sport Trust, sportscotland and Glasgow 2014—the Commonwealth games organising committee—has been designed to encourage young people to become sporting ambassadors, and enhance skills that could be utilised in other areas of their lives. The skills gained from such participation could be invaluable attributes when they enter the labour market. Youth volunteering opportunities such as those that are offered by lead 2014 reinforce the excellent work that is done in the community sport hubs, of which there are two in my constituency, and through the active schools network. Indeed, volunteers are an integral part of the sporting infrastructure, with 150,000 volunteers currently involved in sport in Scotland. The development of youth volunteers is vital to the continued existence of that infrastructure. The success of the cashback for communities scheme, which was launched in 2007, must be stressed if we are to celebrate Scotland’s success in youth sport. The contribution of the scheme to sport and sports facilities is by no means insignificant, with £8 million invested in sport alone thus far and a further £16.7 million committed to projects through to 2014. That initiative is unique to Scotland. By using money recovered under the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 and investing it in community programmes and facilities, largely for the benefit of young people, it tackles social exclusion and attempts to re-engage disaffected youths in education and promote health and wellbeing, primarily in areas that have been affected by crime and antisocial behaviour. The scheme funds partnerships with Scottish sporting associations to deliver projects in all local authority areas in Scotland. The programmes offered are designed to be accessible to all, irrespective of race, class, gender, economic circumstances and physical ability. They are also designed to be individually developmental, with emphasis on the changing of behaviour and attitudes, as well as on improving personal and physical skills. In the 2012 report into the cashback Scottish athletics programme, the most popular response when organisers attempted to discern what difference the programme had made to the lives of the 8,000 young people who took part was “stopping getting into trouble.” That response highlights the requirement for such schemes. Cashback provides young people with activities to keep them socialised and engaged with the community and society as a whole. It is hoped that the long-term outcomes of the cashback for communities programme will include young people becoming successful learners with improved life chances. Indeed, recent evidence has found that there is a link between sporting participation and an improvement in educational attainment. Therefore, sport can be used to engage young people, especially those who face further social exclusion as a result of poor educational achievement. The Scottish Football Association schools of football programme, which is supported by cashback, attempts to re-engage such young people in areas of social deprivation. The programme has observed progress in student attendance, behaviour, academic attainment and motivation. Other sporting programmes supported by cashback have witnessed similar results. Thus, it is clear that sport can be used to prevent any future social exclusion of Scotland’s youth. I congratulate Glasgow youth Olympics bid team on the positive impression that it has made on the International Olympic Committee’s youth Olympic games evaluation commission. Scotland is one of three countries shortlisted to host the youth Olympics in 2018. If the games were to be secured for 2018, that would create further opportunity to progress the legacy of the 2014 events.

I apologise for being late for the opening speech. I welcome the opportunity to discuss underemployment, which has become a prominent feature of Scotland’s labour market. Since the beginning of the economic downturn, much attention has been paid to the rates of employment and unemployment. Despite the overall rise in the numbers of people out of work, it is reassuring to know that Scotland appears to have fared better than the UK as a whole. Recent figures show an increase in the headline employment rate in Scotland of 1.1 percentage points to 71.8 per cent for January to March this year, while the UK’s rate has dropped by 0.2 of a percentage point down to 71.4 per cent. The youth employment rate has particularly improved in Scotland—it has risen by 4.3 percentage points over the year, compared with a mere 0.6 of a percentage point increase for the UK. Furthermore, there has been a significant decrease—a drop of 4,900—in the number of young Scots aged between 18 and 24 who are claiming unemployment benefit. Although unemployment figures are important indicators of economic activity, the growing problem of underemployment in Scotland is also of critical concern. At present, 22.6 per cent of part-time workers are underemployed. Women are affected proportionately more than men; the underemployment rates are 11.3 per cent for women and 8.7 per cent for men. As the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee acknowledged in its report, the importance of unemployment and underemployment should be regarded in similar terms, as both involve a lack of hours spent in work. Research has found that the impact on the wellbeing of those who are underemployed is comparable to the psychological effects on those who are unemployed. There is also evidence in both groups of a strong link with poverty. Among those who are classed as underemployed are those whose skills are seen as being underutilised. In that category, young graduates are one of the groups that are most affected. To tackle the issue, we must examine ways to encourage and support those in higher education to focus their learning on skills that will equip them for the labour market on completion of their course. That can be done by, for example, encompassing work experience programmes in higher education curricula and offering short courses on adapting skills learned through education to the workplace. It is becoming essential for entrants to the higher education system to ensure that they are embarking on a qualification that will provide them with sufficient employment opportunities. Sadly, choosing to train in a field of work with little probability of gaining eventual employment might be a luxury that our young people can no longer afford. That means that we need to provide support to guide people on the choices that they make now and to make them fully aware of how those choices will impact on their careers. For those with skills and experience under their belts, it is important that support is made available to facilitate the alignment of their attributes to suit the contemporary labour market. That might involve the extension of training programmes to adapt skill sets from one job role to another, which can enable more suitable employment or an increase in the working hours that are made available, due to the consequential increase in the employee’s value. In analysing underemployment from the employer’s point of view, I will focus on the use of zero-hours contracts. Under such contracts, workers are officially employed by an organisation, but it has no obligation to provide a guaranteed number of hours per week; rather, work is offered only as and when it becomes available. The prospect of such a highly flexible workforce can be extremely attractive to employers. However, the consequences for workers can be severe insecurity and financial instability. Those employed under zero-hours contracts face added difficulty in making themselves available for additional employment because of the potential for irregular hours that such contracts might entail. That lifestyle is clearly undesirable and unsustainable for a prolonged period. To safeguard members of the working public from the effects of zero-hours contracts, it is critical that we assess their use in the public sector, particularly among public sector contractors. We must ensure that conditions are attached to such contracts to prevent their misuse and that provisions are put in place to monitor that. In Scotland, we understand the value of work and of maximising the potential of the country’s greatest asset—its people. Those values are important to the self-worth and financial security of Scots as individuals, and they play an essential part in rebuilding our economy. Although many of the main tools that are required to achieve full economic recovery remain under Westminster’s jurisdiction, the Scottish Government has embraced the powers that it has to boost jobs and growth to the best of its ability. The Scottish Government has so far employed its limited capabilities in tackling the growing problems of underemployment. However, our ability to determine the economy’s direction is hampered by the powers that are reserved to Westminster and the damaging effect of the restrictive austerity package to which we continue to be subjected. We must continue to work as best we can within our means to provide Scots with a variety of employment opportunities and to support our workers to fulfil those roles as effectively as possible. The Scottish Government continues to demonstrate the necessary commitment and enthusiasm for those goals. Given time, we can get our country back to full working capacity and minimise underemployment for good.

I can tell Alex Johnstone that I voted for the bridge to be called St Margaret’s crossing. The Forth Road Bridge Bill proposes to put the management of both the Forth road bridge and the new replacement crossing under a single bridge operating company. It will also remove legislative barriers, allowing the Scottish Government to include the Forth road bridge in the new contract for maintenance. The benefits of that include financial and operational efficiencies and a strategic and collaborative approach to the management and maintenance of both bridges and the connecting roads from junction 3 of the M90 in the north through to junction 1A of the M9 in the south. The bill also makes provision for the dissolution of the Forth Estuary Transport Authority but allows for the transfer of all FETA’s 72 current employees to a new company under TUPE regulations. That will not only protect their terms and conditions but, more important, ensure the retention of such a valuable wealth of experience so that it can continue to be utilised. A unified management approach is the key to the continued and effective operation of one of the east coast’s vital transport structures, which links north and south. The replacement crossing will provide more efficient and speedier links for both business and commuters, and it will be vital in helping to promote growth in industry and tourism in Scotland. Locally, the new crossing will provide a welcome boost to the economy by removing uncertainties and helping to increase confidence that, in the future, there will be excellent transport links for the whole of Fife, the east coast and beyond. Those links will allow businesses to grow and expand, providing jobs and strengthening the local economy. Commuters will also have reason to celebrate the new crossing. Transport Scotland has confirmed that pedestrians, cyclists and bus users will experience no changes as a result of the bill. It is intended that the new operator will carry out the same functions as the current operator. Once the replacement crossing opens, the Forth road bridge will be used exclusively by buses, taxis, cyclists and pedestrians. That will be of real benefit to commuters on both sides of the Forth. Not only will the provision of a dedicated crossing reduce travel times, but it should make journeys much easier and more pleasant. I hope that it will also prove to be a boon to tourism in Fife by encouraging more tourists to venture into the region and experience all the cultural and historical attractions that are on offer. Commuters have already experienced some of those benefits following the implementation of motorway management technology on the M90 in Fife in December 2012. That was the first time that the intelligent transport system had been used in Scotland. The system creates a dedicated bus lane and uses mandatory speed limits during periods of congestion to minimise traffic jams and provide greater flexibility in journey times for regular commuters. Another early benefit of the crossing is that the system helps to relieve a great deal of the pressure on a heavily used and essential section of the transport network. The approach under the bill will also provide value for money. The twin bridge contract will allow staff to work on both bridges and on connecting roads. Operations will be managed from existing premises, from where the use of vehicles, plant and equipment will also be overseen. That will not only ensure the best use of available resources but result in savings to the public purse. The lack of amendments at stage 3 indicates support from across the chamber. I, too, am happy to support the Government’s Forth Road Bridge Bill. It will ensure the continued effective management of the Forth replacement crossing while simultaneously enhancing existing essential transport links. The benefit of having an excellent system in place to facilitate easy access not only to Fife but to the whole of the east coast is incalculable. It will provide reassurance in the future for the business sector and commuters.

Following the announcement that Hargreaves Services has bought the rights to take over the assets of Aardvark, what details are available about the plans for Aardvark’s Fife operation and the jobs that it supports?

14. To ask the Scottish Government what action the NHS is taking to improve its services for users of British Sign Language. (S4O-02088)

Although the interpreter service that NHS Fife uses for the deaf community is excellent, does the minister agree that improving the co-ordination of services is crucial for BSL users who need additional assistance to communicate, so that their medical needs are fully understood and addressed by medical staff and themselves?

I congratulate Gordon MacDonald on lodging a motion in recognition of the first anniversary of Dads Rock. Dads Rock was started in Sighthill in Edinburgh in February 2012, and it offers free weekly sessions for fathers and their children that allow them to spend quality time together interacting and enjoying themselves. Despite being only a year old, the project is going from strength to strength and is continuing to gather momentum. That is evident in that a second group has been started in Edinburgh and in the plans for the project to expand into Fife. Dads Rock was the brainchild of Thomas Lynch and David Marshall. It came about from discussions between them about how few services were available in Edinburgh for fathers and their children. The group promotes positive measures that allow fathers to create stronger bonds with their children through play and other activities. It helps them to add new dimensions to their role, especially when they are often unable to be with their children every day. Unfortunately, many fathers in Scotland miss out on spending quality time with their children, which research has shown often has a detrimental effect—to varying degrees—on a child’s development. It is for that reason that I welcome the Dads Rock project that will, it is hoped, be up and running in Fife in May 2013. The project will be based in Dunfermline, in an area that features quite high in the Scottish index of multiple deprivation, where dads in particular can find themselves socially isolated. They face difficulty in engaging in the array of activities that are currently on offer to parents that are mainly—unintentionally—female dominated and driven. Dads are underrepresented in many family activities as agencies are often unable to cater for and adapt to the needs of fathers and their children. Fife Gingerbread, which has been established for 25 years and supports communities and families across Fife, will, in partnership with Dads Rock, model a project that has already been established in Edinburgh. It will be funded by the Big Lottery Fund and the Carnegie Trust, and it will be part of getting it right for every child and have links to the early years strategy group, which is a multi-agency partnership. The funding that is received from others and raised by Dads Rock itself also helps it to provide a variety of shared activities and experiences for fathers and children. Those range from visits to museums, days out, parties, playgroups, and the music academy. Music plays an important part in the organisation, which is evidenced by the playgroups’ songs at the end of their meetings, and the concluding song, “We Will Rock You” by Queen. It is also evidenced by the Dads Rock academy logo, which has the guitar at its centre. As a father, I appreciate the importance of music in helping to bond with children. When my son was young, I played guitar to him when he was having a bath. He must have enjoyed it because as he grew older, he took up the guitar himself. At 22, he is quite accomplished on the guitar, having surpassed his father. We still spend many evenings together playing our guitars and enjoying each other’s company. Having found that out, Rhona from Fife Gingerbread has invited me to play at some of the groups, so I am looking forward to doing that. I take this opportunity to congratulate Dads Rock, Thomas Lynch and David Marshall and the many volunteers who are involved on initiating and developing such a successful project. I hope that its success will be recognised in many other areas throughout Scotland and that, where it is needed, it will be taken on board by them. If it is, it will provide dads with greater access and chance to become more involved in the wide variety of activities and meetings that are offered by Dads Rock. Ultimately, that will help to improve the wellbeing of fathers and their children by giving them more opportunities for interaction with their peers, and it should help them to form deeper and more meaningful relationships with their children. Dads Rock is best summed up by the acronym that is used by David Marshall and Thomas Lynch—FPR, or fun, positive, rocking.

I thank Nigel Don for bringing the debate to the chamber. The recent horsemeat scandal has resulted in one of the biggest changes in consumer habits for many years. A Quality Meat Scotland survey revealed that in February this year alone 92 per cent of craft butcher shops experienced increased footfall following media coverage of the horsemeat issue. In the week ending 9 February, many butchers reported sales uplifts of between 10 and 25 per cent. Many customers are visiting their local butcher for the first time, and are seeking reassurance about the supply chain and the quality of their meat. Craft butchers are, of course, in a position to provide such reassurance. In Auchtertool, which is in the Kirkcaldy constituency, one butcher has been going from strength to strength. Puddledub Pork and Fifeshire Bacon Company Ltd is a family business situated at Clentrie farm at the east of the village. Run by Tom Mitchell and his sister Camilla, whose grandfather Harry came to the farm in 1905, Puddledub Pork was established in 1999. As the name suggests, the company is predominantly about pig farming. The Mitchells take care to ensure that the pigs enjoy the happiest of lives. The animals are allowed to grow slowly and are given the care and attention that they need. A pig consultant makes regular visits to ensure that welfare is at the highest level at every stage. The pigs are fed home-grown grain and the Mitchells themselves transport the animals on the short journey to the abattoir, which means that stress is kept to a minimum. Clentrie farm is also home to Puddledub buffalo from the Buffalo Farm Ltd, which is run by Steve Mitchell, who is the nephew of Tom and Camilla. Steve runs his herds of water buffalo and Aberdeen Angus cattle and a flock of Jacob sheep on the grassland. There is also a freshwater loch that is designated as a site of special scientific interest. The Mitchells’ philosophy is quite simple: they believe that produce with low food miles that has not been shipped halfway around the world is tastier than produce that has been. It is hard to argue with that, especially as a longer food supply chain can result in scandals such as the horsemeat issue. The Mitchells and many other local butchers regularly sell their food at farmers markets throughout Scotland, including the one in Kirkcaldy on the last Saturday of every month, which has been running for 12 years. It sets up in the centre of the town in the square outside the town house, which makes it easy for locals and visitors to access it. Farmers markets are a great way for producers and consumers to cut out the middleman, and the farmers market in Kirkcaldy is no exception to that. The range of suppliers typically includes suppliers of meat, fish and dairy produce, fruit and vegetables, preservatives and beverages. Many local butchers have stalls at the market. The likes of Hilton Wild Boar, Dalachy Beef & Lamb and Seriously Good Venison set up alongside Puddledub Pork. Fife’s food ambassador, Christopher Trotter, regularly visits to provide cooking demonstrations. A year ago, Kirkcaldy farmers market was in danger of closing due to a lack of business, but an appeal for more people to use it resulted in an increase in footfall and extended support from Fife Council. By July, new stalls had been added to give customers more variety, and 12 months on, the market is stronger than ever. That is a clear indication that it is valued by both customers and traders. Fife Council’s confirmation of support is a further welcome boost. The obvious benefit of farmers markets is that farmers can produce and sell directly to customers. There is an abundance of farmers in Fife, which makes markets such as that in Kirkcaldy the shortest and easiest route possible from producer to consumer. By responding to the appeal for more business, customers displayed the fact that they value the reassurance of knowing where and how food has been produced. That can be provided only by speaking to farmers themselves. The further benefits of farmers markets include the reduction of carbon footprints and the ability to keep local economies healthy, both of which are vital measures of success in a modern Scotland. I applaud the work of Puddledub Pork and its fellow butchers, and encourage customers everywhere to visit farmers markets and local butchers as often as possible.

I welcome to Parliament Mike McFarlane, chair of Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society, and members of the committee, volunteers and supporters and friends of the society. Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society was formed in 1986 after vandals drove a car into Jonathan’s cave, set fire to it and destroyed the swan drawing that is part of the Wemyss coat of arms and is now lost forever. The society’s aims are to protect the caves, educate people and spread greater awareness of the caves’ importance to a worldwide audience. Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society must be congratulated on not only its efforts to preserve the caves but its vision for the future, in recognising the caves’ potential for the Wemyss area and the benefits that they will bring locally and to the general Fife economy. Sadly, though, the Wemyss caves are once again under threat from not only human interference but nature itself. Many of the caves will soon be lost through coastal erosion or land slips and, consequently, one of the jewels in the crown of Scottish history will be gone forever. It is essential that everyone helps Mike McFarlane and his team to resolve that issue as quickly as possible, to ensure the caves’ preservation for posterity. The Wemyss caves are of vital historical importance to Scotland, as they contain more historically significant markings than all the other caves in Britain. The historical importance of the Wemyss caves has been reiterated by a leading academic in early Scottish history and culture, Dr James Fraser, who stated: “From the perspective of Scotland’s early medieval past and its study, the significance of the Wemyss Caves can scarcely be exaggerated because they are a truly unique phenomenon. Objects and locations bearing the markings that have come to be known as ‘Pictish symbols’ represent the single largest body of evidence that has survived from the centuries when the Picts dominated political and cultural life in Scotland. The symbols are, so to speak, Scotland’s hieroglyphics. To lose the examples in the Wemyss Caves—by far the richest, most numerous and most complex assemblage of all—would be an unutterable tragedy. All efforts to ensure their preservation and recording for posterity are to be encouraged.” The Wemyss caves include Jonathan’s cave, the unnamed cave, St Margaret’s well, the sloping cave, the east and west doo caves and the well cave. The caves, which are all different shapes and sizes, have been used by many groups of people for a wide variety of purposes over thousands of years, including prehistoric cave dwellers, the Picts, early Christians, Norsemen, Jacobites and smugglers. The markings in the caves can be classified in three groups: pre-Christian, Christian and Viking. The symbols and markings left by individual groups throughout the ages provide us with a valuable insight and understanding of their different cultures and living practices. The drawing on the east wall of Jonathan’s cave is one of the oldest drawings of a ship in Scotland—it is probably that of a Pictish ship. Pre-Christian drawings are mostly of Pictish origin and include elephant figures, animals and ornaments. The Christian drawings are mainly Pictish, but this time include early Christian symbols and cross markings. Those markings left by the Vikings show symbols of Norse gods: Thor with his hammer, followed by the sacred goat; Freya, portrayed as a goose; and Odin pictured as a trumpet form. However, there is still potentially much more to discover. In all probability, many hidden archaeological treasures are waiting to be unearthed in those sections of the caves that are partially or completely filled in. The Wemyss caves have attracted a great deal of academic interest throughout the years but just how widespread that interest is internationally is perhaps best exemplified by the following. In 1990, while on a skiing holiday in Bulgaria, I engaged in a conversation with a couple from Germany. When I told them that I came from Fife, they proceeded to show me a four-page article from a German newspaper about the Wemyss caves. They could not understand why we had not protected and developed such an important historical site that was part of our heritage. The well-known author, photographer and educationalist, Hamish Brown MBE, in his widely read book, “Along the Fife Coastal Path”, remarked: “It seems extraordinary that so little has been done to protect this unique site.” I recently attended Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society’s annual lecture, which was delivered by Joanna Hambly of SCAPE—Scottish Coastal Archaeology and the Problem of Erosion—which is an organisation committed to the research and promotion of Scotland’s coasts. Joanna’s lecture, entitled “Visualising Wemyss caves”, gave an excellent overview of how the plan to utilise state-of-the-art survey and visualisation methods to digitally preserve the interior of the caves and their carvings would enable people to explore the caves virtually in incredibly realistic detail. The project also affords an excellent opportunity for engagement with the local community. Six of the Wemyss caves are situated on the western part of the east Wemyss coastline and form part of the Fife coastal path, which, at 117 miles, is the longest trail in Scotland, attracting thousands of walking visitors a year. That highlights the need for a purpose-built visitor centre, which would simultaneously raise the profile of east Wemyss by generating jobs and, hopefully, lead to greater investment in the area. It would also allow people to further their knowledge about this important part of Scottish history and provide many positive opportunities for active learning experiences, which would fulfil one of the aims of Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society. I thank the Scottish Government and Fiona Hyslop, the Cabinet Secretary for Culture and External Affairs, for their efforts in bringing the matter to the attention of Historic Scotland, which is willing to provide technical advice and is considering grant support to achieve a long-term viable solution to ensuring that the caves remain intact for future generations. Only yesterday, I had a meeting with David Paterson of Fife Council about the Wemyss caves, and I recently had a discussion with the National Lottery about the caves. It is now a case of bringing all the interested parties together to develop a long-term strategy for the caves in the Wemyss area, of which Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society, with its wealth of knowledge about the area, will be an integral part. I thank Save Wemyss Ancient Caves Society for its commitment and dedication in the past to the Wemyss caves and I thank all those involved for their continued fight for the caves’ future and determination to highlight their historical importance to Scotland and the local area. Despite often having faced an uphill struggle over the years, they have not wavered in their belief in the importance of the Wemyss caves to our historical landscape. They have championed their cause with passion and enthusiasm in the belief that ultimately, by realising and bringing to fruition the full potential of the caves in many different ways, they will not only benefit the area but preserve something of real historical value and one of the jewels in the crown of Scottish history for the benefit of future generations. That is why I will continue to offer my support and help them in any way I can to achieve their objectives. I urge the minister and members here today to avail themselves of the opportunity to see the importance of the Wemyss caves by visiting on one of the open Sundays, which run from April to September.

The Forth road bridge is one of the most iconic structures in Scotland and it is also the second longest single-span suspension bridge in the United Kingdom. The bill proposes to put management for the Forth road bridge and the new replacement crossing under a single bridge operating company. The benefits of doing that include financial and operational efficiencies and a strategic and collaborative approach to the management and maintenance of both bridges. Further, the bill proposes to transfer the current employees of the Forth Estuary Transport Authority to the new company, ensuring that their experience is retained. A unified management approach is key to the continued operation of one of the east coast’s most vital transport structures and, in particular, the creation of the Forth replacement crossing. As MSP for Kirkcaldy, I see the replacement crossing as being vital for growth and for transport links. Locally, the new crossing is welcomed most by businesses, as it will remove all uncertainties in the business community. Businesses know that in future there will be excellent transport links for the whole of Fife, the east coast and beyond, which will allow them to grow and expand to provide jobs and strengthen the local economy. Commuters will also have reason to celebrate the new crossing. Transport Scotland has confirmed that pedestrians, cyclists and bus users will see no change as a result of the bill, as the new operator will carry out the same functions as the present one. Once the replacement crossing opens, the Forth road bridge will be used exclusively by buses, taxis, cyclists and pedestrians, which will provide a real benefit to commuters on both sides of the Forth. Having a dedicated crossing will reduce travel times and make journeys much easier and more pleasant, and it is hoped that it will prove to be a boon to tourism in Fife by encouraging more tourists to venture into the region. The replacement crossing has already provided benefits for Scotland. It is currently progressing on time and on budget, and it now directly employs 1,200 people. Many more people will be indirectly employed in the next three and a half years until the project’s completion, and there will be many opportunities for the local and national economies. Last December, motorway management technology was implemented on the M90 in Fife, which is the first time that an intelligent transport system has been used in Scotland. The system creates a dedicated bus lane and uses variable mandatory speed limits during periods of congestion to cut traffic jams and make journey times more reliable. That is another early benefit of the crossing, especially as it will greatly help a very busy section of our transport network. The replacement crossing has generated 110 places for vocational training and for the long-term unemployed, and community benefit clauses will deliver an annual average of 45 vocational training positions, 21 professional body training places and 46 positions for the long-term unemployed. The replacement crossing contract is the first contract to demand that subcontracts are advertised on the public contracts Scotland procurement portal, which means that all job opportunities must be advertised in local jobcentres. Already, 63 per cent of subcontracting opportunities and 89 per cent of supply orders have been awarded to Scottish firms, and the final stages of assembling the steel components will be carried out in North Queensferry and South Queensferry. The Forth Road Bridge Bill will ensure the continuation of the effective management of the Forth road bridge and the replacement crossing, and of the benefits that those essential transport links provide now and in the future. I am happy to support the Government’s bill at stage 1.

I, too, thank Mark McDonald for bringing the motion to Parliament and allowing us to debate the report, “Count us in: it pays to listen.” As many members have, I have had to deal with constituents who have family members who have been diagnosed with autism. All of them are looking for additional support and many are struggling to get any form of support at all. Having no prior knowledge of local voluntary support groups in their area, they seek guidance to help them to provide the best possible care for their loved ones. That is why we must welcome the Scottish Government’s investment of £13.4 million over the next four years. I hope that it will help to improve the situation for adults and children with autism by providing the means for agencies to help to implement appropriate resources and strategies, where necessary. It will also help families who, although dedicated and committed to looking after loved ones with autism, are sometimes under pressure, as are lone parents, who often feel isolated and unable to cope. “Count us in: it pays to listen” highlights the challenges that face the 50,000 Scots with autism, and calls for a greater working partnership between the Government, local authorities and support organisations. Listening to people with autism and their families can bring about meaningful change that impacts on their quality of life. The national survey shows that 91 per cent want more say in their support; that 79 per cent think that the public’s understanding of autism is poor or very poor; that 69 per cent of adults with autism have not had an assessment of their needs since turning 18; and that 66 per cent feel that they do not have enough support. That is why it is important that people with autism and their families are listened to and their recommendations taken into account. If they are allowed to take part in planning future services, that can highlight the conditions that they have to deal with daily. The four main areas in the report—“Sustained employment”, “Choice and control”, “Challenging discrimination” and “Professional knowledge and access to support”—all show the need for greater partnership working to provide the services that people with autism and their families want and need if they are to get appropriate support. A theme that runs through the report is that there is a lack of understanding by service providers and employers, and a lack of training in the health service to facilitate quicker recognition of signs of autism in order to implement practices that are needed to provide adequate support to individuals. In the research, 27 per cent of respondents said that they had been misdiagnosed and 23 per cent said that it had taken three years to get diagnosed, which equates to stressful times for individuals and their families. I have had the privilege on several occasions of visiting in Kirkcaldy the new Scottish Autism outreach base, which was opened in 2011. The base was suggested by parents and users who thought that there was a need for it in the Kirkcaldy area. The staff and volunteers must be congratulated on providing services that are designed to meet the needs of those who use them. The base offers social areas and a wide variety of activities such as food preparation, menu planning, budgeting, art work, music therapy and information technology access, all of which are designed to follow the individual’s support plan. I thank the National Autistic Society Scotland for its excellent report and for highlighting the experiences and difficulties that people with autism and their families have in accessing a range of appropriate services. The report also highlights the lack of understanding in many sectors of the community of the needs of those with autism. If those needs were addressed, that would help to enhance the quality of life of people with autism. It is essential that we engage with and listen to people and families who deal daily with autism, so that we hear how it affects their lives in order that we can provide them with the future that they deserve.

I welcome to Parliament staff and volunteer members of Fife Gingerbread. It was a pleasure to attend Fife Gingerbread’s 25th anniversary celebrations, and a privilege to be a guest speaker at the launch of the think big, dream big project that was recently held in Glenrothes. One of the highlights of the day was the presentations, which were delivered with enthusiasm and skill by lone parents, many of whom are in Parliament today. Fife Gingerbread is a voluntary sector organisation for lone parents from all over Fife. Its remit, which has remained constant over the years, is to provide accessible, approachable and non-judgmental support, as well as advice and information, to all lone parents. It provides services to people from varying backgrounds and walks of life, with children of all ages. Fife Gingerbread offers a variety of services, including advice and information; one-to-one support; support through local groups; advocacy and representation; family activities and events; volunteering opportunities; and teen parent support. The services that are offered are invaluable, as lone parents, who constitute some of most vulnerable members of society, find themselves facing new challenges and increasing stress and worry because of the potential loss of income following the recent welfare reform changes. Figures show that, in Fife, there are 10,500 lone parents, with a median age of 36, 66 per cent of whom live on an income of less £15,000 a year. A report by One Parent Families Scotland indicates that many lone parents lack confidence, have low self-esteem and lack social, educational and vocational skills. They are often left trapped in social isolation, stuck on benefits and struggling with debt and poverty. That is why the work that Fife Gingerbread is engaged in across local communities is both invaluable and important. Fife Gingerbread, with its 10 staff and 22 volunteers, is the only organisation of its kind in Fife and rightly prides itself on being open, inclusive, approachable and friendly. It maintains excellent links through its work with a wide range of local, voluntary and statutory services to identify and engage with lone parents in order to make accessible and provide the best services available. Many of the projects that Fife Gingerbread offers, such as aspire—a nine-week course that the organisation designed to increase the knowledge, skills and confidence of lone parents—are backed up by other agencies, which provides lone parents with access to a broad spectrum of help in many fields, catering for such aspects as budgeting, relationships and learning how to stay healthy and safe in a fun and supportive way. Fife Gingerbread also offers other services in the form of advice, information, support and advocacy. Its buddy project, which aims to match hand-picked lone-parent volunteers with parents who need practical and emotional support, is a huge success. What struck me most, having spoken with many of the volunteers from the buddy project, was the passion and pride that they exhibited when discussing the work that they were doing with lone parents—that is a great credit to them. Some 82 buddies have now been involved in the project, with around 23 now in employment and 27 at college or university. A further 14 are volunteering in the community, and 19 continue to volunteer with Fife Gingerbread. I have had a particular interest in the teen parent project since its inception, due to the fact that my constituency has one of the highest teenage pregnancy rates in Europe. The pilot of the project took place in Leven and proved very successful, which led to the project being launched in Kirkcaldy in 2011. The project’s main aim is to identify specific issues affecting young parents that impact on them and their parenting skills. It provides one-to-one support to teenage parents in conjunction with group work and peer support. The project addresses many of the issues that are faced by teenage parents, such as isolation, post-natal depression, and mental health and relationship problems, thus enabling them to try to overcome the difficulties and challenges that they face in order to do the best that they can for their children. The ability to identify and understand the support needs of teen parents has ensured the success of the project from the time of its first referral in January 2012. It now works with more than 50 families in the Kirkcaldy area, with the main emphasis being on working in partnership with such groups as the YWCA, Barnardo’s, Mellow Parenting and the Cottage Family Centre in Kirkcaldy. That partnership working has helped to contribute to the project’s success. I will quote a teen parent who is involved in the project to highlight how important the work is: “I was terrified when I found out I was having a baby and I felt quite alone. I am so glad I now have someone to talk to who can help me and who knows how I am feeling.” Since it began, the teen parent project has supported 341 parents and 316 children in the Levenmouth, Kirkcaldy and Glenrothes areas. Project outcomes include mothers showing increased confidence and self-esteem, better health and wellbeing and increased parenting and self-advocacy skills. Children show improved levels of physical, intellectual, emotional and social development and are engaged with more and wider-ranging services to help facilitate their health and wellbeing. The gateway project, which is specifically aimed at vulnerable families, is currently running a pilot in a local primary school that focuses on early intervention and support for local families, the benefits and impact of which should become apparent in future years. Recently, I was privileged to spend a Sunday morning in Kirkland high school, interacting with parents and children in a series of tasks and games, including around healthy eating. It was a delight to see families participating and bonding with one another while having a good time. I have no doubt that when that project is rolled out, it will prove a success. I found the whole experience most enjoyable, despite getting soundly beaten at football by a six-year-old boy. I attended the recent launch in Glenrothes of the Poverty Alliance report “Surviving Poverty: The Impact of Lone Parenthood”, and I congratulate Fife Gingerbread on working in partnership with the Poverty Alliance on that report. I bring the report to the attention of all MSPs in the chamber and I urge them to read its findings. I also thank the Fife Gingerbread community researchers for all the work that they put into the report and to Claire, Debbie, Lana, Kelly, Nicola, Lisa, Kerrie and Hazel for such an excellent presentation. Key issues for lone parents that are highlighted in the report include food costs, debt, employment opportunities, stress and isolation—issues that clearly reflect the challenges of balancing and managing life as a lone parent. Fife Gingerbread offers many other services that I have not had time to mention but which are, nonetheless, as important in helping lone parents across Fife. I have no doubt that, through the dedication of the staff and volunteers, Fife Gingerbread will continue to highlight the issues facing lone parents throughout Fife and maintain the provision of an excellent and valuable service to lone parents and some of the most vulnerable families in society. Having such a fantastic, flexible team with a proven model of success driving it forward, Fife Gingerbread will undoubtedly continue to adapt to ever-changing circumstances and deliver the best possible services to lone parents in Fife.

I, too, thank Dave Thompson for bringing to Parliament this debate on prohibiting cold calling for property maintenance and repairs, and for highlighting problems that are associated with cold calling. It is likely that every one of us will have had to deal with constituents’ complaints about cold calling and the distress that it has caused, especially to elderly people. The TSI campaign to prohibit cold calling for property maintenance and repairs is backed by Citizens Advice Scotland, Neighbourhood Watch Scotland and many others. The campaign must be welcomed because, too often, the most vulnerable people in society become the victims. Cold calling for property maintenance and repairs has led to an increase in doorstep-crime incidents that have been reported to the police and trading standards over the past few years. The people who initiate doorstep calling—namely bogus workmen, high-pressure sales people and fake officials—often target older people and those who live alone. A consequence of that is often burglary, when distraction techniques are deliberately employed to enable theft to take place. On several occasions, victims have lost their life savings and through embarrassment are often fearful of telling relatives or friends. The financial implications frequently result in those people living in hardship for many years. The vast majority of identified rogue traders have no local connections and no fixed premises in the area, which makes them extremely difficult to track down. A recent survey by the TSI that got feedback from 9,000 householders showed that 96 per cent of households do not want doorstep callers. The figures surely show that the public would overwhelmingly back legislation to prohibit cold calling for the purposes of property maintenance and repairs. There have been several local campaigns, such as TSI’s campaign in Aberdeenshire entitled “Cold calling—don’t buy it” and Fife Council’s trusted trader scheme. However, the most successful has to be the cold calling control zones scheme that was initiated by Cardiff Council, which was supported by police community officers and trading standards teams. Since its inception in the spring of 2008 in the Heath and Canton areas of Cardiff, 83 per cent of residents believe that the number of cold callers has decreased, 80 per cent believe that they are safer in the zone and 90 per cent are more confident in being able to turn cold callers away. The police reported a significant reduction in crime of all types in cold calling control zones, including burglaries, theft from motor vehicles and all other types of theft. The cold calling control zones have been so successful that they are being rolled out to another 11 locations across the city. It is encouraging that Highland Council is setting up a cold calling control zone in Inverness and is trying to establish further zones across the Highlands, in conjunction with various partners. A substantial amount of evidence illustrates that prohibiting cold calling can have a significant impact on the community. It reduces crime and thus reduces the misery that is inflicted on the most vulnerable sectors of society. I hope that the Scottish Government will take the opportunity to discuss the TSI in Scotland’s campaign to prohibit cold calling.

I thank James Dornan for bringing the debate to the chamber. Make young people your business encourages employers to recruit young people straight from school, college or university and simultaneously tries to remove businesses’ perception that young people who come straight from education without life experiences are not ready for the workplace. We need only look at Diageo, which is a massive employer in my area and is currently investing £150 million in new facilities on the outskirts of Kirkcaldy. Diageo’s human resources director, Pamela Scott, has said: “At Diageo, we are passionate about participating with all our young people to help them grow and realise their full potential. We recognise that our success in the future will depend on the quality of the young people we attract now and therefore recruiting some of the best and brightest young people is a key part of our strategy. Through our talented employees we will ensure knowledge and skills are passed on to the next generation enabling us to remain world leaders in the spirits industry.” That statement from Diageo, which is the world’s leading premium drinks business, shows how confident it is in investing in young people and how the continued success of the company in retaining its place as a market leader depends on that. That is a vital message that we must ensure is taken on board by the 75 per cent of businesses in Scotland that do not recruit young people from school, college or university. It is essential that they realise the potential that is available in the pool of young people who are currently seeking employment. The implications of ignoring the skills that they have to offer could have a significant impact not only on the economy, but on future generations. Recruiting young people allows companies to develop skills and qualifications that best suit their needs. Young people’s work patterns are more flexible, they are more willing to move to different work locations, and they are often more creative, innovative and willing to learn. All those qualities are important in helping to secure the stability of any company. Businesses throughout Scotland need to be aware that a wide range of measures is available to help to plan, recruit and develop the skilled workforces that they need. The www.ourskillsforce.co.uk website highlights the wide range of support and financial assistance that is available to them, including support from Skills Development Scotland, Jobcentre Plus and all Scotland’s local authorities working in partnership. Recruitment incentives, wage subsidies, free advertising for vacancies and up to 50 per cent of training costs are all available to employers who recruit young people. The Scottish Government’s unique modern apprenticeships scheme is the most recognised apprenticeships scheme in the UK and is hard to beat. It offers a wide range of incentives for employers who recruit young people into employment. The 2013 Scottish apprenticeship week will run from 20 May to 24 May, and will again celebrate the value that the Scottish modern apprenticeships programme brings to the employer. It will build on the success of the 2012 scheme, which was launched by our Minister for Youth Employment, Angela Constance. In that scheme, more than 40 events that involved employers, training providers, colleges and modern apprenticeships, took place throughout the country. I wish Skills Development Scotland’s campaign every success in its aim to highlight the potential of young people, and I hope that more businesses throughout Scotland will become involved and discover the support and financial assistance that are available to help them to plan, recruit and develop the skilled workforces that they need. If they realise that potential and all the measures are in place to help them, that should, I hope, help to maintain the current fall in youth unemployment at the rate that is currently being achieved by the Scottish Government and its partners.

2. To ask the Scottish Government how it guarantees fair access to the grid and the right to choose independent connection providers for built and planned renewables installations. (S4O-01639)

Does the cabinet secretary agree that competition in relation to grid and energy supply and building and connecting the corresponding infrastructure is essential if we are to achieve our energy targets, guarantee grid security and enable energy exports to the European market?

The information that was received by the constituency MSP in a letter a few days ago from the DWP was that the Remploy factory in Leven has been added to stage 2 of the process and is under threat of closure, with its employees facing redundancy unless expressions of interest are received from individuals or organisations that are willing to continue the business as a viable commercial enterprise. Will the minister join me and Tricia Marwick in writing to the DWP to oppose the latest threat and to ask for more time to be allowed for Scottish Enterprise to find a suitable buyer?

12. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to increase the uptake of foreign language qualifications among university students to increase their employability. (S4O-01537)

The developments in the European labour market, the current mobility programmes and increasing internationalism strongly underline the need for university graduates of all disciplines to acquire practical and useful language competencies. Does the cabinet secretary agree that offering such abilities, as is done through the University of Edinburgh’s languages for all scheme, is a major factor in providing future access to job markets and business success?

I, too, thank James Dornan for bringing to Parliament the motion congratulating St Andrew’s First Aid on its first aid week. First aid plays a vital role in everyday life in communities throughout Scotland. The St Andrew’s First Aid Scottish first aid week aims to raise public awareness of how important basic first aid is, to highlight the need for individuals to acquire life-saving skills and to highlight how early intervention, even with basic skills, can save lives. As someone who has held a first aid certificate since I was eight years old, through being a member of a voluntary youth organisation, I have found the training to be extremely beneficial throughout the years. I little realised that the skills that I obtained would become crucial and be put into effective practice in the years to come. Sadly, in many medical emergencies when an accident occurs, few people intervene to help the casualty—mainly due to lack of knowledge and confidence. Instead, people prefer to wait for the ambulance service or other professional help to come. In many cases, the first few minutes are very important, and if appropriate action is taken, it makes a huge difference to the casualty’s chances of survival. There have been two incidents in my life in which the skills that I learned have played an important part. My first response in administering first aid had a crucial impact, when a friend suffered a large cut to his leg while working and a main blood vessel was hit. Without thinking, I put my training into action and stemmed the flow of blood by applying compression to the wound and elevating the leg. I reassured my friend and kept him calm while sending someone to get an ambulance. This was in the days before mobile phones. In the second incident, my two-year-old son had swallowed a large boiled sweet that his older brother had given him. Alerted by screams of panic from his mum, I rushed into the room to find him lying on the floor struggling for air. Straight away, I put into practice what I had been taught, and very quickly a large boiled sweet was rolling across the living room floor. To this day, I can remember the look of relief on everyone’s faces. Since then, my son—who is now 21—has never eaten a boiled sweet. I have no doubt that, on that day, the first aid skills that I had been taught were life saving, and I am eternally grateful for that. First aid skills are important not just in individual situations but at large organised events, where there is an increased chance that someone will need first aid. In 2014, Scotland expects a large increase in overseas visitors and large attendances by Scottish citizens at the homecoming events, the battle of Bannockburn celebrations, the Ryder cup and the Commonwealth games. Basic first aid skills will no doubt be needed—unfortunately—to deal both with minor injuries and, more important, medical emergencies, in which the taking of appropriate action will make a huge difference. I welcome Scottish first aid week because it promotes basic life-saving skills and raises awareness of how important they are in responses to the most common medical emergencies. Research shows that implementation of those skills greatly improves people’s chances of survival in more serious situations. It is essential that a positive message that emphasises the benefits of life-saving skills is sent out to communities throughout Scotland. I hope that that will encourage many adults and teenagers to avail themselves of opportunities to acquire the knowledge and confidence that are necessary to administer basic first aid. One never knows where and when first aid skills will be needed, but there can be no disputing that possession of those skills can and does make a difference—sometimes the difference between life and death.

2. To ask the Scottish Government what actions it will take to raise energy productivity in Scotland in order to ease the energy cost burdens on individual households as well as to create a more competitive marketplace for small businesses. (S4O-01447)

Does the minister agree that the emphasis on greater energy productivity in the future not only helps to compensate for diminishing oil and gas resources but is also, with the Government’s energy efficiency infrastructure and renewables strategy in mind, the best way to ensure a reduction in costs for Scottish families and businesses in the long term?

I refer members to my register of interests. I welcome to the Parliament Jenny Ritchie, Reagan McLauchlan, Chloe Whyte, Kiah McIntosh, Robbie Swanson and Olivia Ewan of the 5th Fife scout group Kirkcaldy, along with one of their leaders, Carol Lindsay, and James Duffy, chief executive of the Scout Association, Duncan Clark, chairman of the association’s Scottish board, Alex Duncan, its regional commissioner for the east of Scotland, and other members of youth organisations from across Scotland. The national camping competition for scouts has been running for many years in various formats, with the current competition having been run for the past five years under a new regional structure for scouting in Scotland. Black’s of Greenock has provided sponsorship for the competition, providing vouchers to the value of £500, £300 and £200 for first, second and third places respectively, and the Scout Association is grateful for its continued support. The competition consists of patrols of six scouts aged between 10 and a half years and 14 and a half years, with the combined ages of the patrol members not exceeding 77 years, thus ensuring the participation of a wide range of ages. To reach the finals, the scouts had to win their district competition and then take part in one of the three zonal qualifiers at Templars’ Park in Aberdeen, Bonaly in Edinburgh, and Lapwing in Paisley on the weekend of 23 and 24 June. The top 10 teams then went through to the final at Fordell Firs national scout activity centre in Fife on the weekend of 15 and 16 September. During the competition, the teams are judged on the basis of various skills, including leadership, teamwork, initiative, general camp craft, layout of site, hygiene and safety, cooking skills, camp gadgets and first aid. In addition to setting up camp and maintaining a safe and tidy campsite, the scouts had to undertake a wide range of tasks that tested their general scouting skills. I wonder how many in the chamber today can cook a three-course meal from basic ingredients over an open fire in a set time. Not only did the 5th Fife scout group Kirkcaldy win the Scottish finals with 850 points from a possible 1,000, they were also the winners of their zonal qualifiers, achieving the highest score of any team competing over that weekend in June. The team was led by female patrol leader Jennifer Ritchie, and comprised four girls and two boys, which shows the impact that girls are having in the scout movement today. Female scouts now make up 15 per cent of the membership in the scouting section. The weekends of training preceding the competition highlighted the dedication and willingness to learn of the scouts who are present here today, who, with their leaders, spent every weekend in May, June and August and a couple of weekends in April and September working towards the competition. The results of their efforts can be seen as they sit in the chamber proudly wearing their Scottish championship neckers. The scout movement started in 1907 with an experimental camp on Brownsea Island with boys from different social and educational backgrounds. Some 105 years later, scouting has grown to become the world’s largest co-educational voluntary youth movement, with some 32 million members in 215 countries. Scouting has changed over the years, but it retains its primary purpose, which is to contribute to the development of young people and to help them to achieve their full physical, intellectual, social and spiritual potential as individuals, while encouraging them to become responsible citizens who make valuable contributions as members of their local, national and international communities. Scotland can boast of having the first registered scout troop in the world, which was the 1st Glasgow, established in 1908. Scouting has come a long way since then. Since the world centenary of scouting in 2007, membership of Scottish scouting has seen six years of consecutive growth, with young people joining scouting in ever-increasing numbers at a time when young people in Scotland are often portrayed in a stereotypically negative way by the media. The Scottish scouting 2012 census recorded more than 41,000 members, who operate through 596 local scout groups in all 32 local authorities. Over the past six years, membership has increased by 19 per cent, with youth membership up 21 per cent, the number of adult volunteers up 12 per cent and the number of female members up by some 37 per cent. However, the highest growth has been in the age group that is classed as difficult to get to—namely, the explorer scouts, with an age range from 14 to 17—where there has been an incredible increase of 67 per cent. Undoubtedly, that shows the positive impact that scouting is having in communities in Scotland. Scouting in Scotland is not standing still. It promotes a positive vision of the future that can also be enjoyed by more young people and adult volunteers. Scouting has a demonstrable impact on our communities.

I think that all Scout Association members, and especially those in Fife, are to be congratulated on such efforts. I know that the Scout Association worldwide raises money so that scouts in countries who would otherwise be unable to come to world jamborees can be brought across to events such as the one in Blair Atholl. Scouting also works in partnership with other organisations, such as Girlguiding UK, the Boys Brigade, Youth Scotland and Clubs for Young People Scotland. Scouting has been supported by the Scottish Government cashback for communities scheme and by the national voluntary youth work organisations support fund. That vital funding has not only helped to expand scouting in Scotland, but has contributed to its continued success. Scouting in Scotland is supported by nine professional staff at Scottish scout headquarters, but the heart of the movement lies in the 7,000 or so adult volunteers, who turn up week upon week on their scout night, give up their time at weekends and often use their annual leave to take scouts camping for up to two weeks during summer holidays. That is made possible only by their prior participation in modules for leader training, first-aid certification and camping permits. Many volunteers extend their qualifications even further by going on to gain outdoor qualifications in activities including canoeing, skiing, climbing, archery and other pursuits. That is done not only in their own time but, in some cases, at their own expense. We can only applaud their dedication and commitment, without which scouting would not be the success that it is today. Also integral to the success of the scout movement is the support and back-up that is provided by parents, who take on a variety of different roles within scout groups. To those from the 5th Fife scout group who are present in the chamber today, I say that I hope that they will continue to enjoy the rest of their scouting experience. To the scout movement in Scotland and worldwide, I wish every success in the future. I remain confident that the scout movement will continue to play a vital role in communities across Scotland and have a positive impact in educating young people and helping them to make significant contributions to many different sections of our society.

11. To ask the Scottish Government what recent progress has been made on achieving the HEAT target for accident and emergency treatment times. (S4O-01316)

Will the cabinet secretary congratulate NHS Fife on its dramatic improvements on waiting times for emergency treatment? Newly released figures show that, during July and August 2012, it went from being one of the worst-performing health boards in Scotland in the past year to achieving a performance level in which 98 per cent of people waiting for treatment were seen in less than four hours.

I welcome to the Parliament Mike Small, Fergus Walker, Meg Elphee and Jessica Ramm. I congratulate Fife diet on the launch of its new food manifesto for Scotland 2012, which aims to connect to our climate change targets the way in which we grow, produce, distribute and consume our food. The manifesto connects our environmental policy framework to our health and wellbeing initiatives and encourages us to look afresh at the values that underpin how we organise our food economy. All Fife diet’s policies fall into four themes: low-carbon communities; culture and education; innovation and enterprise; and health and wellbeing. The manifesto contains 20 initiatives that are designed to encourage more joined-up thinking about how we grow, consume and distribute our food and to create real urgency around the health and environmental problems that we face. I will focus on two of the initiatives that appeal to me personally: the soup test and the right to grow. The soup test is about ensuring that no young person leaves school without knowing how to make a pot of soup. At present, the majority of 18 to 25-year-olds—about 57 per cent—leave home without the ability to cook a simple meal. The ability to make a simple pot of soup has multiple advantages. It provides sociability and life skills and is an affordable activity with the obvious benefit of consuming fresh and unprocessed vegetables. All the evidence suggests that, once an individual masters the basic skills of food preparation, they have the potential to look after themselves and others. The soup test fits into the curriculum for excellence and the eco-schools Scotland initiative and allows schools and local authorities to discover and explore more about their Scottish food heritage. The right to grow initiative is about making land that is lying unused available to local groups and communities for local food production. I welcome that initiative, which will enhance the local environment and revitalise abandoned land. In the Kirkcaldy area, there is a shortage of available land for allotments and there has been a significant increase in the number of people on allotment waiting lists. Those are all people who are willing to grow their own food and increase local food production, thereby reducing their carbon footprint, but they are unable to do so. I support the suggestion that land for growing should be a central part of the Scottish Government’s food and drink policy. Scottish food has recently seen a revival, with an increased interest in Scottish produce. That has been helped by the support of the Scottish Government and the role of the climate challenge fund in supporting Fife diet’s work. More than 250 communities from all over Scotland have been able to shrink their carbon footprint with the help of £9 million in funding from the climate challenge fund. They have reduced their CO2 emissions by an estimated 700,000 tonnes. The way in which we grow, distribute and consume our food creates 31 per cent of our greenhouse gas emissions, which is why it is important to support local projects that try to tackle that problem. Fife diet, which was started as a small group in 2007 by Mike and Karen Small, now has more than 4,000 members and is Europe’s largest local food project. It supports various schemes, including community growing areas around Fife, and it has a huge influence on many local groups. Growing local produce that is affordable, sustainable and distributed locally promotes low-carbon communities, culture and education, health and wellbeing, and innovation and enterprise. It is undoubtedly worth promoting and I therefore warmly welcome Fife diet’s food manifesto and wish the group every success in the future.

The bill addresses some critical issues. Reviving town centres is crucial, as they lie at the heart of many communities and reflect economic growth. Bringing up to 5,500 properties back into use in Scotland’s town centres will generate a greater feeling of optimism. It will make town centres more attractive again and more readily accessible to those people who do not have the means to get to out-of-town shopping hubs. It will also create new jobs. That resurgence will benefit towns and communities.

We can all hope that all the empty properties will be brought back into use. Developers and property owners are there to use those properties if we can bring incentives to make all the empty properties go. In Kirkcaldy, we have a number of properties that have been vacant for 10 to 15 years and there has been no incentive for the developers or the property owners to bring properties back into use on our high street. Scotland is in urgent need of more housing. At the same time 25,000 houses in Scotland are empty long term. There are undoubtedly many different reasons for those vacancies. Nevertheless, we need to bring those homes back to the market to help alleviate the shortage in housing. At a time when the UK Government is cutting Scotland’s budget year by year, subsidising vacant commercial properties by more than £150 million a year does not seem like a responsible use of taxpayers’ money. Owners do not need to be scared though, as—despite the limited resources—empty property relief here will still be more advantageous than in England and Wales. The Government needs to be able to make regulations to alter the non-domestic rates regime by varying the rates of relief available for certain empty commercial properties; to alter the level of council tax relief available; and, similarly, to alter the level of council tax payable on long-term empty homes. At the moment, all empty non-domestic properties are entitled to 100 per cent rates relief for the first three months followed by a 50 per cent discount on the rates until the property is occupied for up to six weeks. The bill proposes reducing the rates relief for all other non-domestic properties to 10 per cent after three months. Exemptions for listed and industrial properties or properties with lower value will remain. Subsidising around 19,000 properties with more than £150 million a year in empty property rates does not seem like a fair sharing of the burden and it is the biggest type of business relief in Scotland—more than the small business bonus scheme that assists businesses to actively contribute to our society and to our economy. Reducing the relief for around 6,500 properties currently receiving a 50 per cent relief to 10 per cent will reduce the cost to the public by an estimated £18 million per year. To tackle the huge number of long-term empty homes in Scotland, the Scottish Government needs to be able to make regulations to alter council tax discounts if a property remains empty. Such regulations still give an exemption for the first six months and then only continue for another year if the owners are actively trying to sell their home, followed by the ability for local authorities to reduce discounts to 0 per cent. Local authorities would set those rates, decide what constitutes “actively trying to sell” and decide whether additional exemption periods would be appropriate. With the Scottish empty homes partnership—run by Shelter Scotland—which supports local authorities, private owners and others, and with a consultation on council tax changes to long-term unoccupied properties that runs until 5 October, the Scottish Government is already working actively to reduce the number of empty homes. Those councils who choose to increase council tax for empty homes will also offer advice and support. Proposed measures in the consultation on new council tax regulations will allow councils to impose an increase of up to 100 per cent of the relevant council tax for homes that have been empty for at least a year; to offer 10 to 50 per cent discounts for unfurnished properties that have been empty for between half a year and a year, rather than a 50 per cent discount; to apply different rates of discount or increase council tax in different parts of their area; and to increase rates depending on the time for which a home has been empty. Those measures will be beneficial in generating much-needed additional revenue for councils while simultaneously reducing the number of empty homes in Scotland. The benefits of the bill are self-evident. The empty property rates reform will bring up to 5,500 properties back into use and, with that, kick-start the revitalisation of town centres. That is essential to the “Achieving a Sustainable Future” strategy, because strong and vibrant town centres and business districts are crucial to the economic and social fabric of Scotland. The change to council tax relief for long-term empty homes has potential to drastically reduce their number and provide much-needed homes. The Government is aware of the necessity to take other factors into consideration, and integral parts of the bill allow for different circumstances. The bill will encourage owners of both domestic and commercial property because, in the long term, it will be more advantageous—financially and for the good of the community—to maximise potential by ensuring that all properties are used appropriately. The Government will continue to listen to the concerns of stakeholders from the private sector. It will give them the opportunity to engage in the process before regulations are introduced, and it invites all stakeholders and members of the Parliament to contribute.

I welcome the chance to take part in this debate on celebrating Fife’s outdoor education centre, and I wish Ardroy a successful future that builds on its reputation for delivering an excellent programme of outdoor activities. I congratulate the Ardroy ambassadors on the transfer of the provision of outdoor education at Ardroy from Fife Council to the new charitable trust, and I recognise the efforts of Fife Council staff and the previous Fife Council administration for all their work in helping to make this possible. Ardroy reopened on Monday 14 November last year when the first schoolchildren visited the new centre. Since then, hundreds of Fife children and others have followed them, and the centre is now fully booked until the end of summer. Outdoor centres such as Ardroy play an important part in outdoor education and the introduction of new activities to the many who participate, introducing them to exciting challenges and the benefits of a wide range of pursuits. At a young age and at another centre in Lochgoilhead, I was introduced to various activities that influenced me greatly in my young teenage life. The introduction to canoeing and sailing encouraged me to pursue those activities throughout my teenage years, gaining many qualifications—particularly in canoeing—and going on to train four times a week and compete all over Scotland. Later on, after gaining my qualifications in skiing, canoeing, sailing and archery, I decided to go into full-time employment teaching outdoor pursuits to various age groups of all abilities. If it had not been for centres like Ardroy, my passion for outdoor sport would probably never have been fulfilled to its potential. The work that is done by the staff at Ardroy must be praised. In many cases, children attending the centre would never have had the chance to try out such a wide range of activities, which are delivered with skill, dedication and passion. That makes the whole experience enjoyable for youngsters, allowing them to develop their skills; encouraging them to do their best and be inclusive instead of exclusive; and developing communication and team-building skills—all of which are greatly needed in later life—while enjoying the outdoors. Ardroy’s motto that you are only as good as your last performance shows the high standard and the quality of the activities that are delivered. The centre is audited annually by the Adventure Activities Licensing Service and it is a Scottish Canoe Association-approved centre. Its wide-ranging programme and national initiatives have resulted in its being only the second centre in Scotland to achieve the Council for Learning Outside the Classroom quality mark. The centre’s themed programme also fits in with the new curriculum for excellence in being focused on the adventurous discovery and exploration of wild places, which allows pupils to complete the John Muir award. The woodland activities, outdoor sports and scenario-based courses that are delivered by Ardroy help children from all over Scotland to learn how to overcome adversity, enhance personal and social development and develop a deeper relationship with nature. What better values can we try to develop in our adults of the future? I wish the Ardroy centre all the best for the future and hope that it continues to build on its success, as such facilities are greatly needed to develop impressionable youngsters by offering them organised learning in an outdoor setting, which is probably one of the best ways to learn and to enjoy education.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on RGR Foundry Ltd’s plans to build a new foundry at Fife energy park in order to supply the offshore wind market. (S4O-01033)

Samsung, 2-B Energy, BiFab, the Hydrogen Office and RGR Foundry are just some of the companies that are investing in Fife energy park. Given that investments in the renewable energy sector provide a much-needed boost to the local economy, including important employment opportunities, what further support can the Scottish Government offer?

The First Minister will be aware that, over the past three weeks, the chairman and three members of the board of Adam Smith College have resigned following allegations of bullying, intimidation, victimisation and financial mismanagement. What actions can be taken to hold an external investigation into the governance and management of Adam Smith College?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to ensure that the year of creative Scotland 2012 benefits rural Scotland. (S4O-00580)

How will Government activities for the year of creative Scotland 2012 build on the work being undertaken by councils such as Fife Council, and how does the Government plan to support art and culture community events with the year of creative Scotland 2012 funding? Will the cabinet secretary join me in encouraging organisations and individuals throughout my constituency and Scotland to apply for funding under the first in a lifetime and culture and tourism initiatives? The funding is available through Creative Scotland and the closing date is the end of January.

14. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made towards encouraging co-operation and partnership between further education colleges. (S4O-00472)

What additional measures could be considered to make college boards more accountable and democratic?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what contribution golf and golf tourism make to the Fife economy. (S4O-00424)

The minister will be aware that last week Fife won the golf destination of the year in Europe award at the International Association of Golf Tour Operators awards in Turkey, where Fairmont St Andrews was also named European golf resort of the year. Only a week earlier, Fife won six out of 11 titles in the annual Golf Tourism Scotland gold standard awards. What measures is the Scottish Government putting in place to further promote golf and golf tourism in Fife, and in Scotland as a whole, in order to capitalise on such encouraging developments?

I welcome today’s debate, as it highlights one of the great injustices that were carried out by the Ministry of Defence between 1952 and 1967. The testing of nuclear weapons in the Pacific Ocean at Christmas Island, in surrounding areas and Australia has left a lasting effect on the ex-servicemen who were involved, and their families. Many of those who were exposed to radiation during the nuclear tests suffered severe ill health and early deaths. Of the 2,500 British servicemen who were surveyed by the British Nuclear Test Veterans Association in 1999, 30 per cent had died; most of those were in their fifties and many had died from cancer. The Johnstone boys, whose plight was highlighted in The Sunday Post in February this year, are probably the most well-known case in Scotland but, like many of us speaking in the debate, I have constituents and their families who have suffered from the effects and are still fighting their cases against the MOD. The MOD acknowledges a debt of gratitude but denies negligence, and the Conservative Minister for Defence Personnel, Welfare and Veterans has described the general merits of veterans’ claims as “extremely weak”. On the other hand, affected constituents are asking why the MOD is denying nuclear veterans the opportunity to obtain M-FISH analyses to discover the level of genetic damage that has been caused by radiation, whereas chromosome analysis has been successfully undertaken on 294 retired workers from the British Nuclear Fuels plant at Sellafield. As far back as 1983, Professor Evans of Edinburgh’s Western general hospital used cytogenetic blood analysis on blood samples from a nuclear veteran and discovered an inordinate level of chromosomal damage. Ex-servicemen are demanding that all nuclear veterans should have that blood test carried out, but the MOD has refused and no British nuclear veteran has been able to have that blood analysis undertaken since then. In New Zealand, in contrast, members of the Royal New Zealand Navy who were exposed to the nuclear tests had the M-FISH blood analysis performed in 2004 by Professor AI Rowland, with similar results of chromosomal damage as those detected by Professor Evans. We have to ask why the MOD is refusing to release relevant documents from this era, and refusing to carry out relevant cytogenetic blood tests. What does it have to fear from the results? The MOD’s refusal to grant nuclear veterans the elementary right to discover the degree of damage that was caused to their DNA indicates that it is deliberately attempting to hide the atrocities that were committed against those servicemen who were ordered to assist in the testing of a British nuclear deterrent and the effects that excessive radiation has on the human body. Many civilians among the Pacific islands communities were similarly affected and they, too, have had no acknowledgement or compensation from the UK Government. It is not only the harm that was done to the ex-servicemen and the islanders that requires attention; the long-lasting effects on families of DNA damage that can affect future generations can and should be monitored. The suffering that the victims of the British nuclear testing programme have endured has been ignored by previous Westminster Governments and the MOD. It is about time that the MOD accepted responsibility for the effects of its past policies instead of fighting to avoid its responsibility in the courts. I urge it to bring the matter to a conclusion quickly, and to do the right thing for our nuclear veterans and their families.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking to raise public awareness of myalgic encephalitis or chronic fatigue syndrome. (S4O-00250)

Constituents of mine suffering from ME often tell me that their condition can make the complex, drawn-out process of trying to access support from public services too daunting to complete. The United Kingdom Government’s Department for Work and Pensions is among the most frequently cited obstacles in that respect, but it is not the only one. Are there any measures under consideration to improve support for ME sufferers in that respect?

I congratulate Rob Gibson on securing the debate, which is important because it highlights a fundamental energy policy decision by fellow European countries that sets a positive example for Scotland. Although the decision to exit nuclear energy was made by a reluctant conservative-liberal democrat German Government, the true victors are the German people. The political foundations were laid in the late 1990s by the red-green coalition, which settled in 2002 on an exit in 2021, after a maximum reactor running time of 32 years. The current German Government tried to prolong running times for 12 additional years, but it had to bow to intense public opposition after the nuclear disaster at the Fukushima plant in Japan this March. In June 2011, an exit by 2022 was written into German law. According to representative polls in June, 75 per cent of Germans support phasing out nuclear energy by 2022 and nearly half would prefer an earlier date. In Switzerland, 67 per cent support the exit and 65 per cent are prepared to pay more for an energy mix that relies heavily on renewable energy. We can conclude that the majority of Germans and Swiss have seen through the persistent myths that nuclear energy supporters trot out. The first myth is that nuclear energy is cheap. If nuclear power seems comparatively cheap, that is because it is heavily subsidised. Despite the protestations of safety, no insurance company will cover the risks and costs that are associated with a potential major accident. The immense cost of decommissioning nuclear plants—it is £62 billion in the UK, with more to come—is also offloaded on the taxpayer. That does not yet include the cost of treating and disposing of nuclear waste. The second myth is that nuclear energy is clean. On the surface, nuclear power stations seem relatively low carbon. However, if the carbon footprint of uranium mining, enrichment and transport is added, the situation looks different. Uranium mining is a massive environmental and health hazard to workers and local communities. If we include the unsolved problem of safely disposing of nuclear waste—some long-lived fission products have a half-life of several million years—“clean energy” is the least appropriate term to describe nuclear power. How responsible is any Government that is, as Westminster is, considering building more reactors without having a working policy, and even less a safe storage facility, for existing waste? The third myth is that nuclear energy is safe. After Chernobyl in 1986, Fukushima in 2011 and a variety of lesser incidents at nuclear plants, such as Sellafield in 2005, it is clear that nuclear power is anything but safe. I do not suggest that Scotland’s reactors are likely to be hit by a tsunami any time soon, but no nuclear power station is immune from natural disasters or human error. No installation is immune from that, but a major disaster at a nuclear reactor has dire long-term consequences for human life and health and for the environment. As was evidenced by the Chernobyl catastrophe in 1986, radioactive contamination spreads across borders and leads to soaring cancer rates and environmental poisoning. Even in 2009, 369 sheep farms in upland areas in the UK were still under inspection for contamination that arose from the accident 23 years previously. To sum up, nuclear power is unsustainable, dangerous, polluting and prohibitively expensive, and we do not need it. We do not need it because Scotland is well suited for a variety of green renewable energy supplies. In the Scottish Government’s debate on the low-carbon economy two weeks ago, I highlighted the advances that have been made in renewables technologies and the economic advantages that are being reaped even now in and around my Kirkcaldy constituency. Scotland’s potential renewables resource amounts to 60GW, which is 10 times the current peak Scottish demand. The Scottish Government is pursuing energy conservation and has set out an energy efficiency plan. I am greatly encouraged by the Scottish Government’s principled opposition to nuclear power and all the short-term and long-term risks and costs that it entails. I congratulate the Swiss and German people on making a far-sighted decision about their energy future.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what progress is being made toward creating a Scottish sentencing council. (S4O-00232)

In the minister’s opinion, what measures will the Scottish sentencing council consider in due course to promote greater public understanding of sentencing practice in Scottish courts?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to support job creation in Kirkcaldy and the rest of Fife. (S4O-00193)

In the minister’s opinion, what contribution has the £2 million town centre regeneration grant from the Scottish Government for phase 3 upgrade of Kirkcaldy High Street made to the creation of jobs in Kirkcaldy? What steps will the Government take to maintain that momentum in future years?

I welcome the Scottish Government’s motion on the low-carbon economy. The Government’s ambitious and challenging purpose and targets will make Scotland a world leader in renewable technology and in climate-change targets. The targets of generating 100 per cent of electricity from renewable sources by 2020 and of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 42 per cent by 2020 are demanding, but they are necessary in order to achieve and deliver sustainable economic growth that creates thousands of well-paid jobs in manufacturing and service industries. The £70 million national renewables infrastructure fund shows the Scottish Government’s commitment to renewable energy. It has helped to gain investment from the private sector and will help to deliver 28,000 jobs in the next decade. The introduction of four enterprise areas that focus on low-carbon manufacturing opportunities will help to attract new investment in green energy and increase Scotland’s low-carbon market share, which was worth £8.8 billion in 2008-09 and is forecast to rise to £12 billion by 2015. In my Kirkcaldy constituency, Briggs Marine Environmental Services in Burntisland is serving phases 1 and 2 of offshore wind farms, which are worth millions of pounds to the company and the local economy each year. The company is in a position to extend its contracts when phase 3 goes ahead, under which some 700 turbines are planned for the Firth of Forth alone. At Fife energy park, Burntisland Fabrications—BiFab—has just completed the new Oyster 800 wave generation prototype for Aquamarine Power. In July this year, the First Minister unveiled that fantastic piece of engineering. In 2013, BiFab will start the construction of bases for phase 3 deepwater offshore wind turbines. Also situated at the energy park is the new hydrogen experimental unit, which will involve work with the University of St Andrews on developing hydrogen cells for commercial use. Only a few weeks ago, Kennedy Renewables started work on Fife’s first commercial wind farm—Little Raith wind farm. When that is completed, it will have the capacity to provide 24.75MW, which is enough to provide electricity for 14,500 homes. Over its lifespan, it will benefit local communities by some £1.23 million. Just on Tuesday, Fife Council granted planning permission for a second wind farm with the same capacity at Earlseat. That project will fund 125 modern apprenticeships in renewable energy, in partnership with Adam Smith College in Kirkcaldy. In an area of high youth unemployment, that commitment deserves praise and will help to meet the sector’s skills shortage. Longannet power station is pushing forward with carbon-capture technology. If successful, the technology will remove 25 per cent of Scotland’s greenhouse gas emissions from our carbon footprint. Only last week, there was an article in The Scotsman about Pelamis Wave Power with the headline “Renewables firm on crest of a wave”. The company, which is based in Leith, is looking for investment as a result of the success of its prototype off the coast of Orkney to help it scale up its manufacturing to commercial levels and to provide Scotland’s first commercial wave farm. Three energy suppliers—E.ON, Scottish Power and Vattenfall—are actively developing plans for marine farms using Pelamis machines. Dundee and Aberdeen are also well placed in the renewables sector, which shows that the east coast of Scotland is taking advantage of more than 40 years of experience in North Sea oil and gas. That will help to boost local economies and Scotland’s exporting of low-carbon technologies to countries such as China, Spain, India and Romania, making that worth an estimated £845 million to the Scottish economy. We should consider the potential to produce electricity from large-scale and small-scale hydro installations, which can add a further 200MW to our capacity. The low-carbon economy is not just about renewables. We have to promote low-carbon and active travel. The push for more freight to go by rail will be helped by the Scottish Government’s future transport fund and Scottish green bus fund. When it comes to energy conservation, the £50 million warm homes fund will deliver energy efficient homes in areas that are worst affected by fuel poverty. The success of the climate challenge fund has helped Greener Kirkcaldy to reduce hundreds of fuel bills among the poorest households in Kirkcaldy in the past two years. Almost 30,000 homes throughout Scotland have benefited from the Scottish Government’s home insulation scheme, making them energy efficient and fit for purpose. In that context, however, I am concerned about recent attempts by energy companies to endanger our improvements with unacceptable winter price hikes. Another crucial pillar in the low-carbon economy is Scotland’s zero waste plan, which aims to achieve the best overall outcome for Scotland’s environment in waste management, waste prevention, reuse, recycling and recovery. That will happen only if local authorities, businesses and individuals provide leadership and play a key role in their areas of influence, supported by measures that the Scottish Government has put in place. Co-operation and effective environmental policy in Scotland are crucial, but we need the power to push forward our renewable energy policies. If the UK Government would agree to release the £200 million fossil fuel levy, which belongs to Scotland, Scottish regions could benefit through support for development of renewables, additional match funding and private investment. Control over the Crown estate is vital to ensure that offshore renewables benefit local communities, and to create economic growth in a low-carbon economy.

It is a privilege and an honour to be in the Parliament representing the people of Kirkcaldy constituency. I thank my predecessor, Marilyn Livingstone, whom I worked with on many issues during her 12 years as an MSP and before that, when we were both members of Fife Council. I thank Marilyn for her long service to the people of Kirkcaldy, and I wish her and her family all the best for the future. Rural affairs and the environment are important parts of Scotland’s future. Under an SNP Government, ambitious aims have been adopted and we lead the world with the targets that we have set for reduction of our carbon footprint. That will benefit generations of Scots in the years to come and it will prove that Scotland can be a world leader, not only in protecting our own country but in playing our part in helping the world. The food and drink industry should be congratulated on its success. Sales of Scottish retail brands have increased by 30 per cent since 2007, which has brought in an extra £425 million. Scottish beef sales have increased by 21 per cent and exports of food and drink are up by 15 per cent, all supported by measures that have been taken by the SNP Government. Since 2007, assistance of £34 million has helped 174 Scottish businesses in food processing and marketing. Highlands and Islands Enterprise has invested £2.2 million in helping 67 companies, Scottish Enterprise has helped more than 200 food and drink companies to break into new markets and to develop new products, and the Scottish manufacturing advisory service has supported 74 food and drink businesses. All of that is helping the economic recovery. Rural areas also play an important part in Scotland’s growing tourism industry. Our country, which has some of the most stunning scenery in the world, is becoming more and more popular, and more Scots are spending leisure time at home. We have only to look at the popularity of the mountain biking ranges in Fort William, Aviemore and the Borders, which boast some of the best biking trails in the world. The increase in numbers flocking to our ski centres in the past few years, and the ever-growing numbers who are taking to the hills at weekends, also play a vital part in the economic growth of local economies. The £50 million that is to be invested under the next generation digital fund aims to accelerate the roll-out of superfast broadband to rural Scotland. That shows that the SNP is committed to supporting rural life, rural communities and the rural economy. The roll-out is important for the next stage of Scotland’s development and will ensure that everyone has access to technology and the opportunities that it brings. I turn to the environment. The Scottish Government’s targets for the reduction of greenhouse gases are the most ambitious in the world. We have targets for reductions of 42 per cent by 2020 and 80 per cent by 2050, as we push forward towards a low-carbon economy, which is expected to be worth about £12 billion by 2016. We have set a target for all of Scotland’s electricity to come from renewable sources. Some have scorned that as being unachievable or impractical, but as someone who has spent his life in engineering, I believe that it brings great opportunities and potential for the future of manufacturing in Scotland after many years of decline. We have to reach out and grab the chance to be a world leader in the field. It will create thousands of highly skilled and well-paid manufacturing jobs, accompanied by the thousands of service jobs that the industry will need. The Crown estate revenues that are already being generated by renewables flow from Scotland to a general fund at the Treasury. If Scotland had control of its assets, it could reinvest to develop new and more efficient installations and it could support Scottish companies to establish themselves in renewables. Similarly, if Scotland’s coastal communities are to reap the benefits of offshore renewables potential, the Scottish Parliament must have full control over our sea bed. Recycling rates have improved considerably over the past four years of the SNP Government. In Fife, rates increased from 38 per cent in 2007 to 47 per cent in 2010. Fife Council is to be congratulated as it is one of the top performing councils in recycling. In my constituency, a pilot scheme in more than 500 flats achieved a 92 per cent recycling rate and has, due to its success, now been rolled out to all flats. That shows that easily accessible recycling points encourage residents to play their part. Education plays a crucial part in how we meet our targets. In my youth, environmental issues were never discussed at school, but now more than 3,600 schools throughout Scotland are registered with the eco-schools programme, and more than 1,000 of them are flying green flags, which shows that young children and teenagers have become more aware and concerned about our climate and how we affect it. The Fife diet, with its slogan “Think global, eat local”, is another success story that is backed by the Scottish Government’s climate change fund. It started off with a few volunteers promoting growing and buying local food and actively working to reduce their communities’ carbon footprint by avoiding produce that is flown from the other side of the world. What started out as a small group now has more than 1,000 members. I have referred to our ambitions many times. Why should the people of Scotland not be ambitious? Why accept a slice of cake when we have the ability and potential to reach out and grab the whole cake for the benefit of the people of Scotland?

16. To ask the Scottish Government what measures it is taking to support microgeneration. (S4O-00047)

Does the minister agree that a more streamlined and quicker planning process for small microgeneration providers would be desirable?