As always, I pay tribute not only to the hard work of the cabinet secretary in putting together the budget but to the efforts of the Finance Committee clerking team in helping those of us who are on the committee to scrutinise the budget and shed some light on the issues at hand. I am pleased to have the opportunity to go over some of those issues in this stage 3 debate. The Scottish Government is to be congratulated on producing a positive and ambitious budget despite the tough economic environment and Westminster’s disastrous austerity agenda. Once again, vital components of Scotland’s social wage—free prescriptions, free personal care and public transport for the elderly, and free university education—have been protected. When household budgets are being squeezed by rising food prices and energy costs, those measures are not only welcome but necessary. As a member of the Finance Committee, I am particularly pleased that the Scottish Government has strengthened its commitment to prevention, spending to stop social and health problems before they start instead of relying on expensive cures once it is too late. That philosophy is increasingly being followed in Government strategy, and the budget includes £30 million over two years to support the voluntary sector’s vital work in that area. However, far too many charities are still being given funding settlements for just one year at a time, which makes it hard for them to plan and invest in future services. For example, the Badenoch & Strathspey Community Transport Company, which is extraordinarily good, faces an uncertain future despite providing an essential service that is well used by hundreds of people every week. We need to move to an expectation that funding for community projects will be for several years at a time, which will create the security that these brilliant voluntary sector services need and deserve. On a more general note, I was pleased to see so many parties voting for the principles of the budget at stage 1. That is a testament to the cabinet secretary’s ability and his determination to get the best deal that he can for Scots from all walks of life. It also demonstrates that, despite differences of opinion on Scotland’s constitutional future, a solid majority in this Parliament believe that there is such a thing as society, that we cannot slash and burn our way to a better economy and that a healthy economy is based not on how those at the very top weather the storm but on how those at the bottom are protected from the harsh winds of an economic storm that continues to wreak havoc on communities up and down Scotland. I am still angry that the bedroom tax was imposed on Scotland in the first place. I am angry that other welfare cuts, which are driven by ideology and lack compassion, are causing tens of thousands of Scots to turn to food banks. I am angry that a party that has been consistently and overwhelmingly rejected by the Scottish people for years continues to hold the purse strings. No matter what sterling work the cabinet secretary is able to do within the confines of our financial settlement and no matter how much we may agree with the second-largest party in this Parliament, the fact remains that, until Scotland has the full economic powers of any other nation, there is only so much that can be done to counteract the me-first attitude of Westminster’s right-wing orthodoxy. At the end of her speech, Jackie Baillie declared with great aplomb—I hope that I am quoting her correctly— “Today we can vote in effect to end the bedroom tax”. Well, we cannot. We cannot simply vote to end the bedroom tax—that is the point of wanting Scotland to have independence.

No, I do not accept that at all. We have mitigated some of the worst outcomes of the bedroom tax, but we have not ended it. In fact, Scotland is going to pay dearly, to the tune of possibly £50 million from other services, to mitigate the bedroom tax. Let nobody be under any illusion that we have ended the bedroom tax. The Conservative members who have spoken so far have pointed out that the cabinet secretary has not mentioned business or the economy, and they have said that this is not a budget for business. However, it seems to me from all the reports—those in what I might choose to call the English papers as well as those in the Scottish papers—that the big issue today is not the business community. The biggest issue—the one that is hitting everyone’s mailbox—is the bedroom tax and its effects on housing associations and local authorities. I highly recommend the budget. I can only repeat what many other members have said: the only way to mitigate the bedroom tax is to abolish it, and the only way to guarantee that it will be abolished is to vote yes on 18 September. The budget lays the groundwork for a fairer and more prosperous Scotland. I support the Budget (Scotland) (No 3) Bill and the Government in its efforts to ensure that all future budgets can freely set Scotland’s priorities.

Late in the debate as it is, I am delighted to have this opportunity to state my support for equal marriage. I believe whole-heartedly that this can only be a positive step for Scottish society and in particular for its LGBT community, who have for so long been denied the choice that so many of us have taken for granted: the choice to say “I do”. I pay tribute to the work of Stonewall Scotland, the Equality Network and the Scottish Youth Parliament, which, among many organisations, have been strong, considered and rational voices calling for this necessary change. As well as highlighting the positives, it is important to reiterate to those who do not support the bill that they really cannot have anything to fear from this move towards equality. I believe that the religious safeguards that are currently proposed, whereby religious institutions are permitted, if they so wish, to hold equal marriage ceremonies, suitably protect both institutions that do not wish to do so and those that do. There are institutions, such as certain parts of the Jewish faith and the Quakers, that wish to conduct equal marriage ceremonies, and to disallow that would in itself be faith-based discrimination. Several countries across the world have already legalised same-sex marriage, including a number that are signatories to the European convention on human rights. Religious freedom has remained in place for those with traditional views on marriage, and I suggest that that will also be the case in Scotland. Among its many provisions, the Equality Act 2010 makes it illegal to deny a person or an organisation access to public services—or to deny charities support—based purely on views on same-sex marriage. The act ensures that no duty is placed on any religious body or individual celebrant to conduct these ceremonies. The existing law already rightly states that all decisions on fostering or adoption should be based on the interests of the child, not on the views of the prospective parents. Marriage does not belong to any one organisation. Many people in the LGBT community wish to be married in order to have equal status in society. Civil partnerships do not put same-sex couples on an equal footing. As human beings, they do not wish to be treated differently from anyone else. I believe that the bill will help to make Scotland a more equal society. Many in the LGBT community want to be married in accordance with their religion, and many religions are in favour of same-sex marriage, including Unitarians, Quakers, humanist-liberal Judaists, the Metropolitan Community Church and the Open Episcopal Church. Like other members, I have received correspondence from some Church of Scotland ministers and from observant Protestants, Catholics and people from other denominations in which they express their support for same-sex marriage, so we must not believe that everyone in every church feels that the bill is wrong. The evidence overall suggests that the bill has public support. Opinion polls have consistently shown that the level of support for same-sex marriage is around two thirds of those polled. The 2010 Scottish social attitudes survey found that, when asked the question “Do you agree or disagree that gay and lesbian couples should be allowed to marry?”, 61 per cent of respondents said that they agreed; only 19 per cent said that they disagreed. Perhaps Scotland really is moving on. The Labour Party, the Liberal Democrats, the Scottish National Party and the Green Party all had equal marriage proposals in their 2011 election manifestos, with varying degrees of commitment, and a Conservative-led Government has introduced same-sex marriage in England and Wales. I can remember when homosexually itself was considered a criminal offence. Scotland has come a long way in a relatively short space of time. I hope that the passing of the bill will form one more link taking us towards a progressive, equal and tolerant Scotland. I whole-heartedly support the bill.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what use it makes of academic research from Scottish universities and colleges in formulating health and wellbeing policy. (S4O-02843)

A few years ago, through the University of the Highlands and Islands, a couple of doctors conducted research over a three-year period into the health and wellbeing of older people in the Highlands and Islands, the net result of which has been positive in various communities. My understanding—I do not have evidence for this, but it is my belief—is that about 11 per cent of university research in that field is used by the Scottish Government. That leaves almost 90 per cent not being recognised, and I wonder whether the cabinet secretary feels that there is room to make more use of the experience of health boards of using research across the country.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what the timescale will be for the introduction of areas of natural constraint to replace less favoured areas. (S4O-02821)

What guidance has the Scottish Government received from Europe regarding the criteria that are to be used to define areas of natural constraint?

I, too, thank John Finnie for securing the debate. Oxfam’s record in fighting poverty is quite exceptional. As an organisation it has, more than any other, highlighted the work that has yet to be done. We should celebrate Oxfam’s work in showing that deprivation is not just about money. It is also about mental and physical health, feeling safe and secure, and connectedness to family and community. Oxfam’s work on the humankind index, which released its second annual results for Scotland in June last year, gives us a vital way of understanding this complexity. Gross domestic product growth is no good if all the growth goes to the rich, or if wealth is being created only by breaking the backs and spirits of working people. This week, Oxfam revealed that the 85 richest people in the world own as much as the poorest half of the human race, which is 3.5 billion people put together. The Scottish Government’s stated priority is sustainable economic growth; I hope that, one day, we will see that being extended to include sustainable human wellbeing. One idea that was raised in a meeting in Parliament last week is worth serious consideration: a universal basic income, or citizen’s income. The amount would be enough to cover basic needs and it would be paid to every citizen without means testing. It would recognise unpaid work such as raising children and looking after relatives, and it would support lifelong learning, reduce inequality and give us a real chance to abolish poverty altogether—a mission that less radical ideas have repeatedly failed to achieve. Oxfam’s lift lives for good campaign recognises the importance of building skills and community links as well as providing aid. Here in Scotland, two of Oxfam’s partners recognise the importance of wellbeing beyond money. Tea in the Pot, in Govan, helps women who have mental health problems to share their experiences and ideas. Not only does that element of the project help people to fight loneliness and improve wellbeing, but the project also means that people who are normally excluded from decision-making and ignored by officials can work together to make their voices heard and challenge the policies and conditions that damage their wellbeing. Let us celebrate Oxfam often, but let us work harder on our national performance framework and on introducing some of the key elements that people have declared are a priority for them, which are not about getting more money but involve other areas and issues around wellbeing that Oxfam has highlighted.

14. To ask the Scottish Government what steps it is taking to enhance the role of community councils. (S4O-02790)

As the minister will be aware, in recent months, several community councils have opposed local government decisions and felt that they were not properly consulted or listened to. In some cases, they have disbanded. What words of encouragement can the minister offer those groups?

As a member of the Finance Committee, I endorse the very fair report by the convener, Kenneth Gibson, and thank the cabinet secretary for his speech. The committee learned from expert witnesses that the national performance framework is internationally recognised and admired. It may not be as well known or as widely understood as we would like in Scotland, but it is a tool of international significance. The Centre for Public Policy for Regions has stated that the setting of ambitious targets across all areas is commendable. The cabinet secretary and the Scottish Government should therefore be commended for their determination to make a success of the NPF. I agree with the cabinet secretary that it is pretty well known at public sector leadership level, if not among the public. More can be done to raise awareness of the national performance framework and its national indicators, of course, and I am sure that there will be further attempts to do so. Unfortunately, we have a race-to-the-bottom economy in Britain. As a result, Scotland is one of the most unequal societies in the world. According to Oxfam, the wealthiest households are 273 times richer than the poorest households, and the inequalities in Scottish society are deepening and being exacerbated by the declining progressivity of the UK tax and benefits system. Some 40 per cent of Scots in poverty are in work—that is a national disgrace and quite staggering for a country that is so wealthy. That figure is on the rise, as is the number of people in Scotland who are turning to food banks as a last resort. That is another national disgrace. The Scottish Government can only mitigate those factors. It has no say over how the tax collection system is structured and has simply very little control over the issues that affect people’s lives on a daily basis. I suspect that it is that frustration that has brought the argument into the Parliament today. The cabinet secretary and his colleagues have done a fine job in balancing the budget, given the tight financial constraints that Scotland has faced over recent years. How could we say any different? In real terms, Scotland’s budget has been cut by around 11 per cent over five years, and capital spending has been cut by more than 26 per cent. It is therefore hardly surprising that everybody is tightening their belts and that things are getting worse. I find it remarkable that, under those financial pressures, the Scottish Government has committed to maintaining the council tax freeze. That is the only tax that can put a pound back in people’s packets. The Scottish Government has done that—it aims to do so for seven years. I also find it remarkable that it has committed to a consolidation of public services where possible; that it is investing further in colleges and the training of Scotland’s young people; that it is committed to investing £33 million a year in a welfare fund to try to protect the most vulnerable from Westminster’s austerity agenda; and that it will continue to protect the budgets of the NHS and local government in Scotland. We are faced with a less-than-attractive future if we vote no next year. During his speech at the Lord Mayor’s banquet in London last month, the Prime Minister made it clear that austerity is here to stay.

No, thanks. The Prime Minister called for “a leaner, more efficient state.” From looking at the spending cuts and the desire for privatisation south of the border, we all know what he meant. Sooner or later, because of the way that the Barnett formula works, the Scottish Government could be forced to make decisions that it does not wish to make, including the possibility of cutting NHS Scotland’s budget. Such decisions will be the result of continuous cuts to the overall block grant. That is the reality, and it is generally accepted that those cuts will continue in Scotland next year and thereafter. There appears to be no willingness at Westminster to end austerity or to examine and enact change in the current relationship between the UK tax system and the UK benefit system. I sometimes think that the situation seems to favour the UK Government’s privatisation policies. I believe that a fairer, redistributive tax system is crucial if we are to tackle the poverty that Scotland faces right now and will face in the future. That goal is not achievable under the current arrangements. As we know, Scotland is a wealthy country, but the Scottish Government simply has too little influence to make a real difference to people’s lives. Therefore, I truly believe that independence is the only way to deliver a positive future for the people who live and work in Scotland.

I think that everybody will agree with what Jenny Marra said about the crime that she has described. However, forced marriages are still happening in Scotland. All kinds of things are happening. The motion really incorporates all of that, rather than singling something out. Jenny Marra might have brought her own debate on this one subject—and endorsed the generalisation of the minister’s motion.

On behalf of the Independent and Green group, I would like to echo the support for Dundee’s city of culture bid that has been expressed by members across the chamber. Dundee is, in many ways, a microcosm of Scotland. It is a city with a proud industrial heritage that is reinventing itself for the 21st century and leading the way in video games technology and biomedical research. Over the years, it has been infused with Irish, Italian, Polish, Asian and Chinese immigrants—to name but a few—and both of its top-class universities continue to attract students from all over the globe. The continued investment by the Scottish Government in Dundee’s waterfront will transform the way in which its citizens interact with the city and will, I hope, add further architectural excellence to Dundee’s many cultural accomplishments. I am assured by my Dundonian researcher that the city’s football teams—of which I know absolutely nothing—particularly the one that plays in dark blue, are also worthy of mention for their European heritage and exciting style of play. What really makes Dundee worthy of its bid, though, is its people and how they have shaped their sense of self through the bid. Artists and writers are now thriving in a city that is universally recognised to be bursting with opportunity and ambition. From Sheena Wellington’s show-stopping performance of “A Man’s a Man for a’ that” at the opening of the Parliament in 1999 to the wry observations and brilliant talent of the much-missed Michael Marra, Dundee’s contribution to Scotland’s traditional and contemporary folk scene is legendary. Its links to Deacon Blue, Snow Patrol and The View and its annual blues bonanza demonstrate that that musical legacy continues to the present day. New publishing firms such as Teckle Books and the success of the Bob Servant novels perfectly encapsulate the irreverent Dundonian sense of humour. Those success stories beget popular events, with the DCA’s Dundead horror festival and the Dundee literary festival being other highlights of a packed cultural calendar. The bid for city of culture status gives Dundee an opportunity to celebrate all her heroes. There are too many other cultural strings to Dundee’s bow to mention: the McManus Galleries, the impending V&amp;A museum, DC Thomson, Brian Cox, AL Kennedy, William McGonagall—I could go on. It is worth noting in particular the continuing success of Dundee Contemporary Arts and Dundee Rep, not least because both were established at a time when some would have suggested that arts funding should be a lower priority for the city. As two key drivers of Dundee’s continued regeneration, I believe that they have demonstrated the intrinsic worth of cultural investment, and they are two potent symbols of the dedication of the city of Dundee to its artistic community. They are successful because they are used—and used well—by the folk of Dundee. Dundee fully deserves to be awarded city of culture status, and I hope that, when the judges take in the spectacular view as their train travels over the silvery Tay, they realise that they have just arrived in a city of great culture in any year.

I am very pleased to have the opportunity to speak about the best buildings in Scotland and I thank Mike MacKenzie for bringing his motion to debate. I also congratulate the 12 winners of the 2013 Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland awards and I wish each of them luck for the Andrew Doolan best building in Scotland award that will be announced here later today. I have either seen, or seen online photographs of, the winning designs and they look truly innovative and worthy of their place. Some of them have been mentioned. Mike MacKenzie said that he had a dream—I share that dream—of seeing architecture take its important place in Scottish culture. Patricia Ferguson made the good point that Scottish architects and architecture are often recognised abroad, but there is still a job to be done if the nation is to recognise some of its well-known contemporary architects. We are beginning to get the hang of recognising those who made their mark in the past, but we still have some way to go. I will mention a story that I do not think that I have told in this chamber before. A number of years ago, I visited a school in the east end of Glasgow, where the headteacher’s particular interest in the arts was expressed throughout the school. On the staircase were children’s drawings of what were clearly Mackintosh designs. When we had an opportunity to speak to some of the six and seven-year-olds who had drawn them, I asked what they were. With great indignation, a six-year-old said to me, “Do you not know who that is? That’s Macintosh. He’s a famous Scottish architect. And another thing—we’ve no only done Macintosh, we’ve done Greek Tamson an a’.” That boy said later that he would like to be an architect, too. Raising awareness is everything. What the Doolan family and the RIAS have done with their competition is spectacular. I have a plea to make. I recognise that we are very proud of the architectural history and heritage of Scotland, but I think that it is time that we had tourist trails to some of the most modern buildings and contemporary architecture that we have in Scotland. We have everything to win and everything to be proud of. We could start with this building, of course. Architectural competitions, although often difficult and time-consuming for architects, always attract bids from a considerable number of practices. The total number in this competition has been mentioned already. Although we are seeing only 12, I suspect that there are others that would fascinate us just as well. Mike MacKenzie tried to intervene on Patricia Ferguson’s speech and I suspect that it was to correct her. Although he would like to live in the inspiring Hjaltland Housing Association houses on Shetland, which are absolutely stunning, I doubt that seeing those houses was the first time that he had been impressed by new designs for social housing in Scotland. Competitions such as the RIAS awards genuinely raise awareness, but we have to do a bit more. Architecture, like art, music and other creative art forms, needs to be knitted into and rooted in our education system, which can happen. There is another competition, for our island home—I think that the deadline is next week—which asks architects to design an energy efficient house for less than £100,000. That will be of real interest to a lot of the communities in the Highlands and Islands, which I represent.

Finally, I thank the Doolan family and the RIAS for the work that they do, and for their competition.

8. To ask the Scottish Government whether it will provide an update on its review of the regulatory framework that supports the community pharmacy applications process and the power that national health service boards are given in relation to dispensing general practitioner practices. (S4O-02539)

I know from previous exchanges in the chamber that the cabinet secretary recognises the impact on medical services in remote and island areas of the opening of community pharmacies. I continue to receive correspondence from North Uist and Benbecula about the proposal there. What further assurances can the cabinet secretary give those communities?

1. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to review the document retention policies of all public bodies in the criminal justice system. (S4O-02502)

I thank the minister for her reply, which was useful. What advice would she give to an individual whose ability to challenge decisions made by the criminal justice system has been hampered by an unclear document retention policy that means that the documents that are most vital to him are no longer available?

I, too, congratulate Aileen McLeod on bringing the debate to the chamber. I am pleased to speak about woodlot licences and family forestry in Scotland, both of which I support because of their potential value to Scotland’s rural economy through job creation and forest management. As a member with a keen interest in woodland crofting, I understand the need for woodlot licensing and support it fully. Like Alex Fergusson, I wish that I had thought of the idea myself. I believe that a diverse forestry sector could come as a result of the licences and family forestry, and we should recognise the merits of both. I will speak generally about the potential benefits of the licences but, before I do so, I express my delight at the awarding of Scotland’s first woodlot licence in August for land on the Corsewall estate, near Stranraer. I am delighted by all that I have read about Mark Rowe and Angus Carrick-Buchanan and their agreement to have a fantastic management plan for 37 hectares on that estate. The plan allows Mr Rowe to engage in the felling and abstraction of timber, which he will then be allowed to process and sell as firewood and sawn timber. In return, Mr Rowe will pay an annual rental for the woodlot to Mr Carrick-Buchanan. That is a good method of managing land and, as Mr Carrick-Buchanan said, “This pilot project with the Scottish Woodlot Association sets out to prove that the woodlot licence holder, the woodland owner, the environment and the local economy can all win.” Woodlot licences will be important because they will potentially link local people, land management professionals, forest owners, timber processors and buyers in a co-operative working arrangement, which will provide benefits to existing forest owners and rural communities alike. Woodlot licences could provide the means to create many new jobs in the rural economy and could encourage people to live and work in rural areas. In British Columbia, where woodlot licensing was pioneered, 12,000 people make all or part of their living from woodlot licences. I am sure that members will agree that that is an impressive statistic. It is rightly acknowledged that woodlot licences will bring undermanaged woodland into production, which will lead to more forest management activity than at present. That will involve the input of new machinery and existing and new contractors and will open up new supply chains. Woodlot licences also have the potential to produce thousands of tonnes of wood that could be used locally as firewood or for small-scale log processing or fed into supply chains for large-scale timber processors and renewable energy generators. Family forestry is another aspect of any debate about woodlot licences. Woodlot licences can connect many more young families to the resourceful land that we have. Families have been squeezed out of land leasing because most land use is dominated by large-scale industrial agriculture and industrial forestry and because the price of land and forest has been rising. For example, it can cost more than £10,000 for the purchase of just one hectare of forest. Until now, forestry has not had any prospect of a mechanism for leasing land through farm rental as is the case in agriculture but, with woodlot licences, that can change. They will allow small-scale, decentralised forestry to thrive, and will act as an important stepping stone in the creation of a new woodland culture for Scotland in the 21st century.

I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak on the Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill and I welcome its stage 1 completion. I thank fellow members of the Finance Committee for their commitment, interest and dedication in scrutinising the general principles of this important bill. I also thank the Government for its feedback on the committee’s report, which has made the Government’s position clear on a number of the committee’s concerns. As a result of the bill, the Scottish ministers will become the tax authority for the purposes of the Scottish landfill tax. That is a great step forward. I have confidence in the ability of the Scottish ministers and their staff to take responsibility for the Scottish landfill tax as well as for other important taxes such as the Scottish rate of income tax. The bill enables ministers to make an order to designate another tax authority, and I welcome the move by the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth to set up a new body, revenue Scotland, as Scotland’s tax authority for devolved taxation. Revenue Scotland already exists as an administrative function within the Government, and the Government has been consulting on provisions to establish it on a statutory footing. The Government has indicated that it intends that the administration and collection of the Scottish landfill tax should be undertaken by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency on behalf of revenue Scotland. Landfill tax administration and collection would become a new function for SEPA, which already visits and inspects landfill sites as part of its environmental regulation duties. That would offer significant advantages for the Government. The existing knowledge and considerable expertise in SEPA will create opportunities for significant efficiencies and other operational benefits in relation to the administration and collection of the Scottish landfill tax. I therefore support the Scottish Government’s intention to have SEPA in charge of the administration and collection of the tax. Although I give full support to the general principles of the bill, I draw the Parliament’s attention to two areas of concern. First, I believe that one further waste exemption could be considered. Part IIA of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 states: “If no person has, after reasonable inquiry, been found who is by virtue of subsection (2) above an appropriate person to bear responsibility for the things which are to be done by way of remediation, the owner or occupier for the time being of the contaminated land in question is an appropriate person.” That means—I think—that individual property owners might end up footing the bill for contaminated land remediation through no fault of their own. There are live examples of individual householders who have been charged vast sums for the remediation of contaminated land. In the Cabinet Secretary for Finance, Employment and Sustainable Growth’s statement to Parliament on 7 June 2012, he described four principles that underlie the Government’s approach to taxation and he reiterated them today. They are certainty, convenience, efficiency and that the tax is proportionate to the ability to pay. It is that final principle that I believe is relevant here. My suggestion is that consideration should be given to including in the bill a measure to allow for the costs of contaminated land remediation to be waived if an individual property owner is found to be on contaminated land, has in no way caused the contamination but yet has been unfortunately designated the status of appropriate person because of the lack of someone being found who actually caused the contamination. By putting such a measure in place, the Scottish Government would ensure that its principle of taxation being proportionate to the ability to pay is adhered to. The second concern relates to the committee’s suggestion that there should be a lower rate of tax on island waste, for materials for which there are never likely to be viable recycling or recovery routes. Although the Government has made its position clear on that, I still believe that a review of the issue could be carried out. In Shetland, Enviroglass provides a local solution for Shetland’s waste glass by recycling all the glass that is collected by the local authority through its bottle banks. That has been essential in minimising the financial and environmental costs that shipping glass to mainland UK for recycling would incur. However, not all island communities are fortunate enough to benefit from such a scheme and a review could help to find alternatives for the islands that lack the means to cheaply recycle waste materials. A final aspect of the bill that I will speak about relates to the Scottish Government’s zero waste agenda, which is an ambitious programme of change that aims to create an environment in which we make the most of resources and minimise Scotland’s demand on primary resources. That is to be achieved by maximising the reuse, recycling and recovery of resources rather than treating them as waste. The Scottish landfill tax will play an important role in maintaining the economic stimulus that is required to harness those waste management opportunities and in directing the Scottish economy towards a prosperous future with secure access to resources. By doing so, Scotland could follow the great example of its Nordic neighbour Sweden and make productive use of waste that would otherwise build up at landfill sites. We must ensure that environmental organisations continue to be supported by the landfill communities fund. The Scottish Wildlife Trust, for example, has received £3.6 million to date, which has helped it to develop and manage essential environmental and community projects. The Landfill Tax (Scotland) Bill is a good and valuable piece of legislation. It does what it is supposed to do: it provides legislative provisions for a Scottish landfill tax to replace the UK landfill tax regime. It provides the Scottish Government with real power to take important decisions on a crucial area of taxation and makes use of the experience and expertise of the Scottish Environment Protection Agency. It is conducive to the Scottish Government’s zero waste agenda as we look to greener energy alternatives. Therefore, I support the general principles of the bill.

I hear the member’s support for the communities that are nearest to landfill sites. Does she agree that we will recycle more if we send less waste to landfill and that recycling plants can generate the same noise, dust and disruption as is generated by landfill sites?

9. To ask the Scottish Government when the Cabinet Secretary for Education and Lifelong Learning last met the board of the University of the Highlands and Islands and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02450)

Regarding the agenda for any of those meetings, would the cabinet secretary agree with me that, if UHI is to flourish by attracting students on to its courses, more appropriate residential accommodation will become a necessity at some of the partner colleges? Given the geography and structure of UHI, private development may be less attractive. Does the cabinet secretary accept that there might be a requirement for public funds to allow this necessary development to take place? Would he be interested in discussing the matter with UHI?

6. To ask the Scottish Government what support it gives to Scotland’s film industry and individual film-makers. (S4O-02417)

Countries such as Denmark, Norway and Sweden offer their film industries more financial support. For example, the Norwegian Film Institute provides to Norway’s industry annual state funding of 400 million Norwegian kroner, which is about £41 million, and it has an annual budget of 93 million kroner, which is about £9.7 million. In the face of global competition, strong Government funding for the film industry is a necessity. What approaches does the Scottish Government admire in the countries that I mentioned and what lessons does the cabinet secretary feel we can learn from our neighbours?

I thank Gordon MacDonald for securing the debate. This is a topic that should be debated in the Parliament again and again. Our relationship with alcohol is such a big issue that I hope that a debate on it is secured on at least an annual basis so that we can talk openly about Al-Anon. Most folk in Scotland have relatives or friends who live abroad. Most of us also have an alcoholic in the family or within our circle of friends. At first, most of us do not understand the relationship with alcoholism, but we need to come to understand what is happening to the alcoholic, the symptoms of alcoholism and the effect that the condition has on other members of the family. I think that I am right in saying that, for every person suffering from alcohol addiction, another eight or 10 people are suffering all the symptoms. The madness, the irrationality and the extraordinary behaviour of the alcoholic are often reflected in what become the madness and the irrationality of the lives of those who are trying to live with that person. Al-Anon absolutely understands that. Perhaps the most extraordinary thing about Al-Anon is the friendships that are made when the alcoholic first comes to understand or realise that he or she is sick. The organisation that befriends and understands and is constantly there to remind the person suffering from the symptoms of alcoholism is a wonderful thing to be part of. For the wives—and, increasingly, the husbands—who attend Al-Anon, there is the knowledge that they are part of not only a self-help group, which is literally what Al-Anon is, but an organisation that is truly international. As we have heard, AA started in Ohio in the United States, but the organisation is now international to the extent that, wherever one might go, there will be an Al-Anon meeting taking place, if not that night, the following night or the following morning. There are Al-Anon friends around the globe, because, as we know, every addict is a recovering—not a recovered—alcoholic. Many of us have had the experience of living with alcoholism or someone who is recovering from alcoholism, and nothing settles it like an Al-Anon meeting. The genuine help from Al-Anon is to be welcomed, so I am delighted that Gordon MacDonald has raised the issue in the Parliament. We need to spread the word about Al-Anon to the many hundreds of thousands of people across Scotland who still do not know about it, as it brings incredible comfort. I thank Gordon MacDonald very much for bringing the debate to the Parliament, and I thank the members of Al-Anon who are in the public gallery for the work that they have done and continue to do to bring people to sobriety in Scotland.

Will the member give way?

I, too, am delighted to speak in favour of the general principles of the bill. We should take encouragement from the fact that the Electoral Commission has expressed such confidence in the robustness of it. I commend the work of the committee, which has clearly spent many hours scrutinising the legislation that will provide the basis for the referendum on Scottish independence. I support the committee’s decision to support the Political Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000 as a framework for the referendum. Although the act might not be perfect, it is a useful starting point and helps set the referendum up to mirror past Scottish and UK referendum arrangements and procedures. That includes the provision to give the Electoral Commission the role of independently setting campaign spending limits for the 16-week period before the referendum. I also welcome the long lead-in time for the referendum legislation, allowing ample time for evidence to be presented and gathered and for detailed scrutiny to take place. In addition, I welcome the principle that dates of birth are not to be shown on the polling list in order to protect young people’s details. The bill must put the voter first. I think that Willie Sullivan of the Electoral Reform Society in Scotland said that we must ensure that in this referendum we get to as many people as possible. As policy makers, we must make conscious efforts to do our utmost to ensure that people are as engaged as possible with the independence referendum, which includes the 16 and 17-year-olds who will be able to vote for the first time in their lives. All in all, the bill is a solid piece of legislation and I welcome it. However, there is one issue that needs more attention, which Rob Gibson and Tavish Scott have already mentioned: the use of Gaelic on the ballot paper. The committee concluded: “we don’t consider that a pervasive case has been made for a bilingual ballot paper”. Others have made the case, but I would add that we have 60,000 people speaking Gaelic in Scotland. This Parliament and previous Administrations have given Gaelic its real status in the country. It would be normal practice to have a bilingual ballot paper, as happens in Wales and other countries around Europe.

Yes. It is easy to support Angus MacDonald on that. If the bill is to be truly inclusive, there should be further consideration of Gaelic speakers in Scotland and the fact that Gaelic is an official language of our country. Scottish independence is something that I have long supported, and the Edinburgh agreement was a critical watershed in that it has given the people of Scotland the opportunity to make a life-changing decision to take power into their own hands. By voting yes in September 2014, people in Scotland will not only reject remote and unaccountable rule from Westminster but give themselves a chance to build a progressive new Scotland. The consensual nature of the Edinburgh agreement particularly struck me, and it bodes well for future relations between the UK and Scottish Governments should there be a yes vote. The progressive vision of Scotland includes a possible constitution written by the people. Those who live in Scotland will, for the first time, have the opportunity actively to determine how Scotland is governed, based on the principles that they decide upon. That is an exciting prospect and it will be a vast improvement on the arrangement at the UK level, where no such constitution exists. I know that we are talking about the bill and the bill process, but it is too exciting a moment in history to ignore the possibility of Scotland being an independent state. Scotland can be a more equal society where tax is redistributed in a fair and progressive way. That is critical as we need economic policy that prevents the gap between rich and poor from increasing, as it has done over the past 30 years. It is not acceptable that the wealthiest households in Britain are 273 times richer than the poorest, and according to Oxfam’s “Our Economy” report, that gap is likely to widen. How can that be possible? We can do something about the inequality if we vote yes in 2014. I am sure that that is true. The success of the bill and the desired outcomes will be evidenced by the turnout at the polling stations. There are many firsts here, including the first vote for many thousands of young people and the first vote for everyone in Scotland to vote on the future constitutional status of their country. I refute the often-quoted statement that this is the first time for the people of Scotland since 1707, or in 300 years. It is not; it is the first time ever. They never had the chance 300 years ago. I hope that all those who are actively promoting participation in the referendum will do all that they can to ensure that all who can vote do so. It is our job to ensure that that is the case, and, as Stuart McMillan said in his speech, we must inspire them to vote. The Scottish Independence Referendum Bill gives those living in Scotland the opportunity to vote yes and thus create a new, better future for themselves, their families and their country based on equality, fairness and peace. I am delighted to support it for that reason.

Thank you for your consideration, Presiding Officer. I, too, congratulate John Wilson on securing this important debate. I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in favour of the motion and to speak on Oxfam’s important efforts to explore the means by which we can remove the economic barriers to social justice in Scotland. I wish in particular to add my support for the humankind index, which is detailed in Oxfam’s “Our Economy” report, and for the community-led approach that is designed to empower poorer communities with the means to transform their local economies for the better. For too many people in Scotland, work is no longer a route to a better life; some 40 per cent of those who live in poverty are in work. Put simply, that is because there is an emphasis in the UK economy on wealth creation over the development of adequate mechanisms to distribute wealth fairly. The work of non-governmental organisations such as Oxfam is critical in providing research on how we can address the issue. As members know, Oxfam’s humankind index is designed to move away from gross domestic product as a measure of human wellbeing. In the 30 years preceding the financial crash in 2008, Scotland averaged GDP growth of 2 per cent a year, but a quarter to a third of Scots continued to live in poverty. That indicates that an alternative is not only required, but is urgently required. Oxfam’s humankind index, which is based on widespread consultation, offers that alternative. It measures human wellbeing on issues that matter to people—health, housing, a good local environment and reasonably satisfying work. From the economy, people want suitable quality employment and security of income. All those issues are important to people because they allow us all to live happier and more secure lives. We must endeavour to ensure that we pay great attention to the issues that have been highlighted by the humankind index and that we do all that we can to foster the new prosperity that is detailed in “Our Economy”. It is really important to note that the extensive research shows that having money is not a priority; therefore it makes no sense to base all our economic policies on GDP. I also lend my support to the report’s assertion that state agencies such as Scottish Enterprise must be governed by a socioeconomic duty and should replicate the Highlands and Islands Enterprise brief in order to pursue social and community development in every region. Across Scotland, only 22 per cent of people feel that they can influence decisions in their areas, therefore regeneration needs to be genuinely community-led and we must not rely simply on public and private sector partnerships. That means that, as policymakers, we have a key role in helping communities to shape their local economies and environments, and we have to have the activity and policy that are needed to fulfil the demand for good jobs and a living wage, thus ensuring stable communities in which folk can take pride. Additionally, we must empower communities with the mechanisms to challenge government policies and private sector actions that fail to take into account their socioeconomic and equality requirements. Although I support Oxfam’s assertion that delivery of the Scottish National Party’s manifesto pledge to recreate the Scottish land fund would benefit from a focus on providing adequate support to ensure that poorer communities can benefit, I encourage Oxfam to conduct a similarly informed study of all aspects of land reform, which I believe is so relevant to the wealth and wellbeing of the nation. The recommendations in “Our Economy” appeal to the social democratic nature of Scottish politics and society. We must not only support those recommendations, but act on them to give our communities the mechanisms that they need in order to design local economies that are based on the needs of local industry and people, as well as on the principles of economic and social equality. For me, the most interesting thing about Oxfam’s report is the list of priorities that came from the people whom we talk about as being somehow “other” because they are in poverty. Surely we can listen to those priorities now and take heed of the report.

I commend the Scottish Government, as others have done, for the manner in which and punctuality with which it has addressed this issue. I also thank the RACCE committee and the Scottish Parliament information centre for their helpful reports on the bill, which aid considerably in untangling some of the complexities of crofting legislation. I am aware of the calls to include further changes to crofting law in the bill, which I believe would have only complicated the emergency procedure and perhaps diluted the reasons for its use. It was therefore prudent to leave those other considerations until after the recess and to focus exclusively on decrofting rights for owner-occupier crofters. As I understand it, there are a number of issues surrounding the exact rights for owner-occupier crofters versus owner-occupiers. The minister indicated during the stage 1 debate that he would seek to clarify exactly how many owner-occupiers who are not owner-occupier crofters have been caught up in decrofting problems. Although technically outwith the scope of the bill, that is an indication of the many holes in the fabric of crofting legislation that require resolution sooner rather than later. I trust that the Government will continue to do what it can to clarify and simplify crofting law in the near future. I am sure that the minister has noted Brian Inkster’s comments regarding the length and complexity of even this amendment bill and his opinion that there is not only an opportunity but a necessity for the Scottish Government to simplify crofting law. Obviously, decrofting is the pressing issue and to tack other issues in crofting law on to this amendment bill would have slowed down the process considerably. I am aware that the crofting law group, which Tavish Scott mentioned, is meeting on 27 September for its annual conference, where it will discuss crofting law reform. I am really keen to see the Government continue to consult the group and those in the crofting community on the possibility of introducing further legislation after the recess to consolidate and simplify existing legislation. Given the nuances and peculiarities of crofting, the various legal interpretations offered during the committee’s evidence gathering and the expedited nature of that evidence gathering, I commend the Scottish Government for its responsible and expedient approach. It truly reflects well on the Parliament when it can identify and correct a problem, no matter the origin of the mistake. For the benefit of the crofters of Scotland, we must now pass this amendment bill. After the recess, we can focus on the other areas of crofting legislation that desperately need to be changed. I support the bill.

Having heard the evidence sessions in the Finance Committee, I am convinced of the merits of the land and buildings transaction tax. The slab system of rate setting in the stamp duty land tax is outdated and inefficient. I commend the Scottish Government for striving to meet the four principles of tax legislation that it has committed itself to and particularly for the LBTT’s shift to a proportional and efficient progressive rate of tax. The evidence makes it all too apparent that land prices have been distorted by the slab system, as it discourages the sale of residential property at prices immediately above the thresholds. The move to a progressive tax is a welcome shift in the current housing climate. On Willie Rennie’s comments, the Scottish people would welcome the rejection of Gavin Brown’s amendments because, largely, tax dodging is abhorrent to everybody in this country. We struggle to provide good public services on endlessly reduced taxes, yet it has been recommended that in some of the areas in which tax has been dodged most, we should not implement the regulations. This is the first tax to be introduced after the 2012 act; it is a moment of history. If I have any personal comment to make about that, it is that the bill is almost premature. After a resounding yes result next autumn, we will be in charge of all taxes. However we deal with tax in this country, we will not have to accept a block grant adjustment accordingly, which in effect could leave us no better off.

As I did at stage 1, I note that this is the first of three bills to emanate from the 2012 act that will begin to increase the Parliament’s powers. It is important that we get it right so as to make another statement about Scotland’s competence with regard to tax. I look forward to the day when the Parliament has the full, normal powers of a nation to bring about the substantive changes in our economy and society that we desperately need. I support the bill.

9. To ask the Scottish Government whether its commemoration of the first world war will include conscientious objectors and the role of peace groups. (S4O-02280)

I am reassured by the cabinet secretary’s reply. I have noted with concern the use of the word “celebration” by some people in Westminster to describe the events that will mark the centenary of the commencement of four years of awful, indiscriminate slaughter in the fields of France and Flanders. Does the cabinet secretary agree that sombre remembrance of the lives that were lost in world war one is not a celebration and that we must not glorify that or any conflict?

7. To ask the Scottish Government what support it makes available to multiple sclerosis national therapy centres. (S4O-02238)

I recently visited the Multiple Sclerosis Centre Mid Argyll and I was impressed by the services on offer. However, given that Scotland could be seen as the MS capital of the world and that this serious condition is particularly common in the west Highlands and the islands, which I represent, will the minister detail any work that is being done to incorporate such services into NHS provision for individuals with MS?

I, too, commend the minister and the Scottish Government for the manner in which, and the punctuality with which, they have addressed this serious issue. The problems surrounding decrofting require our most serious attention and have caused real concern among crofting communities in my constituency, so I thank the Scottish Government for acting swiftly to fix the anomaly. I also thank the RACCE committee and the Scottish Parliament information centre for their helpful reports on the bill, without which many laymen and laywomen would struggle, even more than they do already, to digest the purpose and necessity for the amendments that the bill proposes. The bill seeks to extend the legal right to decroft to individuals who have purchased their croft and have become owner-occupiers. I do not think that the Government, or anyone else for that matter, intended through the 2010 act to deny decrofting rights to owner-occupiers. The bill will maintain the intention and purpose of previous crofting legislation by correcting a lack of legal rights that should never have been lacking to begin with. The bill deals with one of the more anomalous legal issues, which is rightly being corrected as quickly as possible. As well as giving owner-occupiers, via the codification, the legal right to decroft, the bill will retrospectively validate the 159 applications to decroft from owner-occupiers that were accepted by the Crofting Commission from 1 October 2011 onwards. The bill will grant legal certainty to those 159 owner-occupiers by reassuring them of the validity and legal status of their croft’s current situation. It is important to bear it in mind that the intentions of this amending bill are limited in scope. It seeks to bring owner-occupiers back under the umbrella of normal crofting legislation by extending to them the legal right to decroft while requiring the same pre-conditions before application, and by giving them the right to the same appeals process as applies to tenants who make decrofting applications. As a member of the cross-party group on crofting, I am aware of the legal complexities that surround crofting, as they surround few other subjects that I know. I note that, in its stage 1 report, the RACCE committee calls on the Government “to ensure that the Bill is clear and competent and does not add further complexity to an already complex body of legislation”. Some of the people who are involved in crofting law believe not only that the bill is unnecessarily complex, but that it is unnecessary in the first place. I am no expert on the legal detail of the bill, and although I believe that new legislation is the correct action to take in this instance, the criticisms that have been made by some people about drafting are cause for concern. Given the nuances and peculiarities of crofting, and given the various legal interpretations that have been offered during the committee’s evidence gathering and the expedited nature of that process, I trust that the Government will be responsible and will listen to all views as the bill progresses. I also trust that the Government will continue to do what it can to clarify and simplify crofting law, in the near future. Decrofting was obviously a pressing issue, so I appreciate that to tack on other crofting legislation issues to the bill would have slowed down the process considerably. I hope, however, that the experience of scrutinising the bill has highlighted for many people the fact that there is in Parliament a will on the need for crofting legislation to be reassessed, and for the legislation to be, as the RACCE committee says, “clear, competent, consistent and fit for the 21st century”. I would therefore be keen to see the Government continue to consult the crofting community on the possibility of introducing further legislation after the recess. I hear everybody groan at the notion of further legislation, but it could consolidate and simplify existing legislation. We must pass the bill expediently for the benefit of the crofting community. After the recess, we can focus on the other areas of crofting legislation that need change. I know that the Minister for Environment and Climate Change is recently appointed to his post, but I believe that, in the three years before the end of the parliamentary session, he could make his name as the minister who fixed crofting law once and for all. I support the bill.

1. To ask the Scottish Government what role Police Scotland plays in community planning partnerships. (S4O-02195)

The public have rightly been outraged by the actions of the Metropolitan Police, which removed sleeping bags, food and other personal belongings from homeless people in London, and justified those acts by saying: “The public rely on police to reduce the negative impact of rough sleepers.” What assurances can the Scottish Government give that Scotland’s justice system will not follow the Metropolitan Police’s callous approach but, rather, will work with other public sector partners to address issues to do with homelessness constructively and humanely?

I thank Joan McAlpine for securing the debate. I think that all members recognise the important role that symbols can play in the lives of the Scottish people. From the cross of St Andrew on the flag to the thistle on the jersey of our national rugby team, symbols can help to unite us across all society’s divisions. Given that 2013 has been declared the year of natural Scotland, it makes sense for the Parliament to add to the collection of the nation’s identifiable symbols by selecting a national tree. I was fascinated to hear Joan McAlpine say that Canada adopted the maple as its national tree only in 1996. Like many Scots, I have relatives in Canada, and I proudly remember being five or six and wearing a wee brooch in the shape of a maple leaf, with the word “Canada” on it. I cannot believe that it has taken all this time for the maple to become the national tree of Canada, when the rest of the world already recognised that. I was interested in how social media have picked up the idea of the tree. Radio Scotland’s “Out of Doors” programme some week ago discussed alternatives, including the rowan tree, the gean, and the hawthorn. There was no doubt that the views of the listeners, and the tweets sent during the programme showed that far in the lead was the Scots pine. The Scots pine is instantly recognisable. There is no other tree like it. It is strong, straight, tall, wily, hardy and independent—just like the Scots. The small distinctive copses are photographed endlessly as an image of Scotland. As a regional member for the Highlands and Islands, I drive through many parts of Scotland where there are few or, sometimes, no trees. However, if there are trees, they are always Scots pines. They get where no other trees go—they sometimes grow out of the stone on a mountainside. From a cultural perspective, the Scots pine comes in many colours and shapes, which symbolises the multicultural nature of Scotland. There is a Scots pine in Glen Loyne that is estimated to be 520 years old. Although that may not be as impressive as the Fortingall yew, it serves as a symbol for the resilience of the Scottish people. Approximately 75 nations have officially recognised or unofficially adopted national trees. Each of the 50 states in the USA has its own tree. There is no reason why Scotland cannot join other nations in recognising a national tree. If anybody is in any doubt, reading the “The Cone Gatherers” by Robin Jenkins will give them the imagery, the sense of the importance of the forest—literally, the seeding and reseeding of the tree—and how the Scots pine is important in our nation in so many ways. Here is to the Scots pine as our national tree.

7. To ask the Scottish Government what regular contact it has with member states of the Commonwealth of Nations. (S4O-02111)

The minister may have seen The Guardian’s report of 5 May that detailed the brutal treatment by British forces of Kenyans who were involved in the Mau Mau rebellion. Does the minister agree that it is important for historical wrongs, either at home or abroad, to be addressed in a manner that will build mutual respect?

I am a member of the Finance Committee, so I have had the opportunity to take part in the evidence sessions on the bill. Two things struck me: the brokenness of stamp duty land tax as a method of taxation, and the fantastic opportunity that Scotland has to begin to recalibrate its taxation system for the public good. The Institute for Fiscal Studies’ description of stamp duty land tax as “a strong contender for the UK’s worst-designed tax” is appropriate. SDLT’s slab structure discourages sales of residential properties at prices immediately above the threshold, which distorts the market, adding to the angst that is suffered by people who are attempting to buy or sell a home. It is madness that the sale of a house for £125,000 will result in no tax burden while the sale of a house for £1 more than that results in a £1,250 bill. There would be a public scandal if personal income were taxed in such a way; why has it been deemed appropriate for house sales to operate in such a way? The proposed move from stamp duty’s slab structure to a progressive structure under LBTT is welcome, particularly in the current housing climate. The unsustainable housing bubble already presents enough challenges to men, women and families throughout Scotland who seek affordable housing, and I am glad that we are removing some of those challenges by making commonsense reforms where we can do. A major problem with the SDLT regime is the amount of money that is lost through tax avoidance schemes. I hope that the removal of sub-sale relief, which has frequently been identified as a facilitator of tax avoidance, will work in tandem with the Government’s other anti-avoidance measures to help to increase the tax take and ensure that everyone pays their fair share. The proposal to exempt rural housing bodies from LBTT will greatly benefit my constituents. As I have said in the Parliament, any step that we can take to promote the building of affordable housing should be considered. I hope that the approach will encourage more such housing to be built. Although many elements of the bill are to be considered further at stage 2, and the taxation bands, collection arrangements and block grant adjustments will require further scrutiny in the months and years to come, I think that I speak for the whole committee when I say that we are encouraged by the considered, deliberative and open approach being taken by the Government. Although I am aware that the cabinet secretary is not inclined to support relief for zero-carbon homes, I am aware that a proposal for a fiscally neutral energy-efficiency modifier has emerged since oral evidence was given by energy organisations in February. In reference to Alison McInnes’s comments, I am pleased that the committee convener is amenable to looking at that again, because I think that it would represent further progress on progressive taxation. I confess that in considering the bill I was mindful of the suggestions made in Professor Mirrlees’s review, which were echoed by Andy Wightman in his submission to the consultation on what sort of taxation regime we should have for property. I certainly have sympathy with Mr Wightman’s suggestion for a radical overhaul of the way in which we think about land and property, but I am also aware that the Scotland Act 2012 allows only for any replacement of SDLT to be a tax on transactions. Therefore, although I would be inclined to support some sort of land value tax, I appreciate that we cannot allow the perfect to be the enemy of the good on this occasion and that the land and buildings transactions tax provides a solid move towards a more equitable system. I note that this is the first of three pieces of legislation emanating from the Scotland Act 2012 that will begin to increase this Parliament’s powers. I look forward to the day when this Parliament has the full and normal powers of any nation’s Parliament and is able to bring about the substantive changes in our economy and society that we desperately need. I support the bill.

I thank the minister for his statement and for bringing the matter to the chamber as speedily as he has done. I would like to reassure the minister that, from all the communications that I have received, it seems that most people understand that the situation is an unforeseen consequence of the legislation and do not blame the Government of the time. Most of the questions that I was going to ask concerned timescale and process. Is the minister in a position to assure people that they can continue to process applications, and that the situation is not frozen at this time? That would reassure people that we are about to simply correct the bill, and not to change it or do anything to impede the progress that is being made.

I am sure that it has not escaped the notice of those members in the chamber that I am the only member of the independent and Green group to speak in the debate. It is unfortunate that business has been scheduled during the PCS strike, and that it has kept my fellow group members away from the debate. Members of all parties had to cross picket lines today but the topic of Trident is so central to my support for independence that I decided to come in to speak to my amendment. At the outset, I make it clear that I support every element of the Government’s motion and applaud its decision to bring the subject to the chamber for debate. Our amendment is designed to add strength to the motion and not to replace, denigrate or contradict it. I also express my sadness, but not my surprise, at the better together campaign issuing a briefing in advance of today’s debate on what they think is the positive case for Trident and attempting to score points against the Government over the issues raised in my amendment. I thought that, at least on the issue of squandering billions of pounds on unnecessary, unworkable and immoral weapons of indiscriminate slaughter, there would be some sort of consensus and serious debate, regardless of constitutional preference. However, it seems that the better together campaign is now a cold house for anti-Trident campaigners. It has alienated churches, unions, peace groups, and the majority of the people in Scotland. It will not come as news to many in the chamber that the issue of an independent Scotland’s NATO membership led me to become an independent member. I cannot support Scotland’s membership of a nuclear alliance, particularly when it pressurises its members to spend a minimum of 2 per cent of their gross domestic product on defence, regardless of the geopolitical circumstances of the time. Not surprisingly, NATO expects a contribution to its military common fund from each member state. In 2011-12, that amounted to £106.7 million from the United Kingdom. That means that, even if we could secure an opt-out from any collective military efforts, we would still be contributing financially to drone attacks on civilians and other aggressive military action. I doubt that those who rail against NATO actions in Afghanistan will make allowances for Scotland because we were not the country that pushed the button. The UK should have been outraged when two innocent young Afghanis were killed recently by NATO troops because they thought that they were terrorists. There was hardly a whisper from the UK Government. Nuclear weapons are a stain on humanity, whether they are in Scottish waters, American bases or Russian silos. The argument of those who wish to keep Trident essentially boils down to, “After you, I insist,”; in the Labour Party’s case, if it is cheap enough, it does not seem to mind. However, a Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament report entitled “Nowhere to Go” highlights the fact that there are no viable alternative bases for Trident in the UK. If we get rid of Trident from Scottish waters, it is gone for good. My concern is that the disarmament of the UK would not be in NATO’s interests and that barriers will be erected against such a step. Although Canada and Greece have removed nuclear weapons from their soil as members of NATO, I believe that those weapons had reached their sell-by date and those countries had the strategic cover of close neighbours who host nuclear weapons. The imposition of nuclear missiles on German, Belgian and Dutch soil, against the wishes of their Parliaments and citizens, should be a warning to us all about the co-operative nature of NATO. Norway’s experience with NATO should also be a lesson. Although Norway has successfully resisted the imposition of nuclear weapons on Norwegian soil, it has not succeeded in changing NATO’s nuclear policy, which was reaffirmed last year at its Chicago conference. Every member of NATO is a signatory to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, but no significant efforts have been made to reduce the number of weapons that the alliance holds and shares. The treaty has therefore failed.

I accept the member’s statement—of course I do. However, there is a positive alternative to NATO membership that allows Scotland to act as a responsible global citizen. There are many examples of other nations that operate outside NATO and yet are more than adequately prepared to defend themselves. Those countries are not pariahs on the world stage and are not subject to threats from abroad. Given the recent St Patrick’s day celebrations in America, one would have to be very brave to claim that Ireland’s non-membership of NATO has somehow resulted in its isolation or affected its ties with the world’s remaining superpower. Ireland, along with a number of other non-NATO countries such as Finland, Sweden, Switzerland, Austria and much of central and eastern Europe, is a member of partnership for peace, which promotes bilateral co-operation between NATO and the partnership for peace countries on a case-by-case basis.

Although some of those countries plan to accede to NATO, others view partnership for peace as an opportunity to co-operate internationally without compromise and without signing up to a military alliance that is predicated on a nuclear first-strike policy.

As the SNP campaign for nuclear disarmament briefing in advance of the NATO debate stated, an independent Scotland “should not sneak timidly onto the world stage, afraid of our own shadow.” Getting rid of Trident would herald the beginning of real nuclear disarmament, as would a distinctly different Scottish defence policy. I move amendment S4M-05988.1, to leave out from “and further” to end and insert: “; considers membership of NATO to be a barrier to the removal of Trident, whether as part of the UK or as an independent Scotland; believes that membership of an alliance predicated on a nuclear first strike policy is as harmful to Scotland’s international reputation, and poses the same threat from external agents, as the presence of a nuclear deterrent in Scottish waters; notes that European countries such as Ireland, Finland and Sweden are not members of NATO and are still considered to be full, cooperative members of the international community; further calls on the UK Government to disarm Trident and not to replace it with any other nuclear weapons system, and commits to ensuring that, in the event of independence, Trident will not be permitted to operate from Scottish waters.”

We have had a good debate and, again, I repeat my support for the Scottish Government’s bringing this entirely relevant matter to the chamber. Ruth Davidson’s suggestion that the retention of Trident nuclear missiles showed responsible government led to Alasdair Allan’s brilliant question whether she was also suggesting that every country without a nuclear deterrent was irresponsible. Of course, the answer was that they were when perhaps the answer should have been that countries without nuclear weapons are more responsible with regard to global as well as local security.

I rest my case. We still have not heard a reasonable answer to Alasdair Allan’s still relevant question. All sides of the chamber will agree that multilateral disarmament is to be desired, but how do we achieve that? Somebody has to go first and I believe that, with independence, Scotland could do that and be the leader in the world as it has been in so many other areas. We heard extraordinarily emotive language from Ms Davidson, who talked about us “walking away from our neighbours”. In fact, we will be walking towards our neighbours. Ruth Davidson gave us a terrific list of alternative uses for the money that would be saved by ending the nuclear deterrent, all of which have been suggested by members of the SNP. There is no lack of ideas—it is a shame that she could find nothing to recommend Trident.

I am well aware of what the member intended, but the point is that those are all worthy areas on which to spend the money and areas where it is needed. Ken Macintosh stated that the SNP is somehow not serious about getting rid of Trident and that the debate was some kind of jokey waste of time so that a bit of rhetoric about independence could be heard. How dare he? Many people have an ambition to rid the United Kingdom of nuclear weapons, but the difference is that his party has had its shot and failed.

The SNP has explained its position on that. I do not agree with it, so why would I try to explain it? There is a real issue for the Labour Party. We know about the number of people with Labour Party membership cards who believe that the only route now to be rid of Trident on the Clyde is to vote yes in the referendum. Mr Macintosh suggested that the issue that he again highlighted is shattering the unity of the SNP. I should know about that. The disagreement is not over the outcome of unilateral nuclear disarmament; it is about the route that we take to achieve the goal. The big common factor—and the big difference with the Labour Party, which has failed in its ambition—is self-determination by the Scottish people. I can assure Mr Macintosh that, on that, there is no disunity. Labour needs to understand that inescapable fact. Better together? I do not think so. What a funny wee speech from Mr McMahon. When someone knows that they are wrong, they often cover it up by poking fun at people who are trying to deal with a serious subject. He is right that the Scots arnae stupit. They have had 60 years of political rhetoric and claims that we will be rid of Trident from the Clyde, but nobody has achieved it. Now, it is within the grasp of the Scottish people to achieve self-determination and unilateral nuclear disarmament, and to head towards multilateralism. I urge them to do that. Those members who are not in the SNP or the Independent and Green group need to think on this: if they believe, as most of us seem to do, that the only option that is open is the one that everybody has, come October 2014, will we be closer to being free of Trident if we vote yes to better together, or if we vote to be able to make the decision for ourselves? I ask members to support my amendment.

Will Annabel Goldie take an intervention?

3. To ask the Scottish Government what plans it has to integrate low-carbon behaviour change into the second report on proposals and policies. (S4O-01907)

I thank the minister for his full response. Will he and other ministers consider how the good principles in the behaviour change framework will be taken forward in the development of proposals and policies in the RPP?

We heard a great deal from the cabinet secretary about the success of the Scottish food and drink sector—about the increase in turnover and exports and about the recognition that the Scotch label is a label for quality—but also about the possible need, given the present crisis, for a food revolution. We heard what that might look like. I was pleased to hear that the education programme involved 800 schools and 55,000 pupils, which is really impressive. There are many community food initiatives across the Highlands and Islands. Those that I have seen in action are impressive. Local people have been supported to grow food and serve their communities by providing local produce. That is all to be applauded and is a really good move. The hungry for success school meals programme will also develop and grow as time goes on. We recognise the need to promote food and drink in the international market. However, the irony is that local people cannot have a diet of oysters, venison and partridge or whatever, as Neil Findlay suggested earlier. What irritates me slightly about that is that a local diet is available to everybody. We have to get back to that. The Fife diet does it well, as Alison Johnstone made clear in her point about the soup test and the ambition that every child leaving school will be able to make a good, healthy and nutritious pan of soup. That is just a start. There is a real misconception that buying cheap means somehow feeding a family cheaply. Sometimes, the cheapest stuff in the supermarket is actually the most expensive, particularly if people buy processed meals: they may say “serves two”, but frankly they may be just enough to serve two cats. There is a real need for education and I hope that our education programme will meet some of that need. Claire Baker and Tavish Scott both made the basic request that we should use our own produce. I expect that we have all experienced buying fish and chips, iconic to locals and visitors alike in Scotland, only to find that it is frozen Icelandic cod. How does that happen? Sometimes the chip shop is on the same street of the port where our own fish has been landed—but the fish is immediately trucked elsewhere. There is something wrong there. We talk about food miles, and the position must be exacerbated if we deliver white fish to foreign ports while importing the same type of fish because it is cheaper, which raises the question whether it is an inferior product. Buying local produce should be the default position of procurement contracts. Alison Johnstone and others have made the point that if we are genuinely to support our local producers, we must take the lead. I agree too on the point about supermarkets, some of which have been well supported by Government money to highlight and promote local produce. However, what do we get in return? What control do we have over them? If the large supermarkets and the huge producers are going to be part of our culture in years to come, some Government control over them and real leadership will be needed, so that they are under no illusion that serving local produce is essential if they are to win any of our custom. Turning to Alex “Big Mac” Johnstone—

Enough said. Perhaps we are still a nation of small businesses as far as food production is concerned—certainly, that is so in the Highlands and Islands. In Alison Johnstone’s amendment, she asks us to acknowledge that and to ensure that we have the opportunity to engage the nation and educate people about the food that we eat. That approach makes sense, saves energy and food miles, acknowledges the skills of the grower and offers better health to the nation. I spent yesterday planting tatties with children from Hilton primary school in Inverness. The photographs of the event show the sheer pleasure and delight that they took in getting their hands filthy planting tatties. I ask members to support the amendment.

It is with great pleasure that I open the debate on the role of crofting in the Highlands and Islands. It is timely that members have the chance to put on record their appreciation and support for crofting and the vital link that it forms in Scottish agricultural and rural communities. Around 8.4 per cent of the Highlands and Islands population live in crofting households, which is the same as Scotland’s percentage of the United Kingdom population. Crofting and crofters are fundamental to the viability of some of our remotest communities. Crofting not only supports local business but is responsible for the production of high-health breeding and store stock, which are valued by farms throughout Scotland and are an incredibly important part of our food supply chain. A large part of Scotland’s natural heritage and designated sites lie within the crofting counties. For example, almost 70 per cent of the land designated as national nature reserves and more than 60 per cent of the land designated as sites of special scientific interest in Scotland are in the crofting counties. That compares with an overall proportion of Scotland’s area that is designated as NNR of 2 per cent and as SSSI of 13 per cent. Although those areas of national importance are correctly designated and protected by Government bodies, we must not forget that the management of them is, to a great extent, carried out by crofters. We must ensure that crofters continue in that vital role and that they are encouraged and justly rewarded for doing so. The most immediate issue facing crofters is the legislative morass surrounding decrofting. An unintended consequence of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 is that there is no provision for owner-occupier crofters to decroft their land. That has led to the Crofting Commission suspending such applications. Inksters, the solicitors firm, has suggested that until emergency legislation is introduced to fix that, the Government could, under section 1(3) of the Crofters (Scotland) Act 1993, compel the commission to process decrofting applications, as has been done in the past. I urge the Government to consider that measure while it works with the commission to fix the anomaly. Another practical change that would help crofters would be to change the rate of grants for the crofting counties agricultural grant scheme. Grants through the Scotland rural development programme are paid at a rate of 50 per cent to all land managers, regardless of their location. However, crofters in the Western Isles, Shetland and other remote locations naturally face, as a result of their geography, higher costs than do those in mainland Scotland. The Government recognises that fact when it awards funding for infrastructure projects, such as schools. CCAGS has been underspent for many years, and raising the rate of grants to 75 per cent would help to increase uptake and encourage some much-needed investment in croft holdings. Positive community development and regulation are fundamental to crofting’s future. Highlands and Islands Enterprise is working on a new resilient rural communities policy that will require partner organisations to agree to shared outcomes and activities. I welcome its focus on residency and social and economic development to allow communities to become resilient. The goal is to assist communities with developments that will ultimately generate revenue. It is clear that the Crofting Commission and HIE need to work together closely for mutual benefit. It would be useful for progress and development to be included in the Crofting Commission’s annual report. Of course, crofting is both a collective venture and an individual one. However, under the current common agricultural policy regime, crofters who work collectively and still use common grazings have found it difficult to access support for the whole area of land that they manage. There has been a significant decline in the use of common grazings and I seek assurance from the minister that the Scottish Government will examine closely the difficulties that grazings committees face in accessing the support that they need. I also highlight the work that the crofting connections project is doing to encourage young folk to think about a future in crofting. It has had great success in reaching huge numbers of schoolchildren throughout the region. It is a positive, proactive project that the Scottish Government is to be commended for encouraging and co-funding. I reiterate the point that crofting is important to sustaining the viability of remote communities throughout Scotland and I urge the Government to continue to listen to, and engage with, the financial and legislative concerns of the crofting community. At a recent event by the enough food for everyone if campaign, we were informed by a representative of a farmers organisation from Malawi—I do not know where the quotation originated from—that agriculture is the mother of cultures. In the crofting communities, we are talking not only about the culture of husbanding animals or land but much more than that; we are talking about rural communities not only surviving but working well. Two recent reports have shown a huge sense of wellbeing and happiness in the Highlands and Islands. I ask that the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Government acknowledge that and try to understand some of the source of it. I suggest that crofting, which is often considered the bottom of the food chain in Scottish agriculture, is the key to much that we respect, admire and regard as the future of life in the Highlands and Islands. I also suggest that, for little money, we could make a huge impact on many livelihoods. I look forward to hearing the rest of the debate.

5. To ask the Scottish Government what progress the national performance framework has made in reducing inequality. (S4O-01866)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his answer. Does he agree that the ambition for a fairer, more equal society is a priority for an independent Scotland and that evidence of how we can achieve that is crucial?

I will be quick because I will miss out the paragraph in which I quote information that Maureen Watt referred to in the Bield, Hanover and Trust housing associations’ social return on investment study. As a member of the Finance Committee, I was fortunate enough to take part in many of the evidence sessions for the report. I was particularly struck by the sheer financial and strategic size of the challenges posed by our ageing population, particularly for the sheltered housing and care sectors, and the need for a holistic, concentrated approach from Government, local authorities and housing associations to tackling those challenges, including investing at as early a stage as possible. We have already heard that the number of over-65s in Scotland is set to increase by 21 per cent between 2006 and 2016 and that the number of over-85s is set to increase by 38 per cent in the same period. It means that there will be an estimated 1.43 million people of pensionable age in Scotland in 2035. In contrast, there are only 36,000 sheltered housing units in Scotland—enough for 2.5 per cent, or 1 in 40, of that cohort. While not every person of pensionable age will need to stay in a sheltered housing unit—many older people are able independently to live full and healthy lives—the gap between those two numbers is a matter of some concern. Although the Government’s housing for older people strategy is a welcome recognition of that challenge, I would echo the report’s concern at “a lack of specific measurable targets within the housing for older people strategy”, which would help us to measure its effectiveness. Another element of our considerations is the urban-rural divide. Various graphs in Professor David Bell’s January 2012 paper on fiscal sustainability show that rural areas, such as Argyll and Bute and the Western Isles in my constituency, have and will continue to have a much higher proportion of older people than urban areas. Although an ageing population will have a national impact, we are already beginning to see the difficulties posed for older people with care needs in remote areas of Scotland. We must bear that in mind. I commend Highland Council and NHS Highland for their new collaborative working pattern. Perhaps I could continue Stewart Stevenson’s speech by saying that we should welcome the fact that we have an ageing population. Hopefully, we can all look forward to a healthy old age. No one wants to be a burden or a problem, yet all the statistical stuff seems to suggest that that is the case. A number of years ago, I was fortunate to show around a group of people from Burkina Faso. We went on a trip north with a translator and, as we entered a village, our visitors pointed to a care home and asked what it was. I explained it to the translator, who explained it to them. There was a great deal of discussion. They did not understand the concept at all and asked me how young people learn if older people go and live in a care home. I have a terrific example. At a primary school that I visited quite recently, when an eight-year-old arrived 10 minutes late for his class, a young teacher chivvied him about it and he said that he was sorry but he had had to help his great-granny with her iPhone. It was a light-bulb moment for the primary school teacher. The community now has a formal class in which the teachers are eight and nine-year-olds and the pupils are 65, 75 and 85-year-olds, learning about iPhones and having cloud and Facebook sessions. We could repeat that example. It occurs to me that we might use older people to teach young people the craft skills that we are in danger of losing, such as making a pot of soup from a good bit of Western Isles mutton. I understand that the next Nordic horizons event to be held in May will look at care home provision in Sweden. I would encourage those interested in the approach of our Nordic European neighbours to attend. We are not alone in facing these challenges and should not be afraid of finding out what possible solutions other countries have identified to address them.

I am pleased to have the opportunity to support the bill’s basic principles at stage 1. Although a lot of my colleagues have identified during the debate issues that require more work or consideration, I think that there is consensus that work can be done to improve the sustainability, accountability and transparency of the aquaculture and wild fisheries sectors. Indeed, the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee’s report on the bill commented that “the current draft of the Bill is very much the starting point, and should the Bill reach Stage 2 it will require amendment in order to make it ... robust”. There is no doubt that the cabinet secretary and the Government have a tough and delicate task on their hands. Again, the committee’s report reflected the difficulties in finding consensus on the way forward on contentious issues due to current difficulties between the aquaculture and wild fisheries sectors. Although it is not something that can always be addressed by legislation, I am sure that we would all agree that improving the relationships could and should be part of the process. The importance of the aquaculture and wild fisheries sectors to Scotland’s Highlands and Islands communities must not be underestimated. The popularity of Scottish salmon continues to grow at an exponential rate, with aspirations to increase sustainable production by 4 to 5 per cent per annum until 2020. Enabling the sectors to continue to grow and to provide jobs and exports in an ecologically sound manner is essential to ensuring the sustainability not only of the sectors but of many rural and remote communities. However, do we know what the increase of 5 per cent per annum until 2020 will look like? Planning applications are already being refused on the basis of proliferation. We need a national plan if we want to see such growth. Recognising the opportunity for Scotland and realising its potential is the right thing to do. Being sensitive to the natural environment, legislating against abuse by a large industry, always protecting the fantastic wild salmon and its life cycle and believing that quality must not be compromised by quantity should all be Scotland’s trademarks. Of the issues that the bill seeks to address, I am of the opinion that the presence of sea lice and the strategies used to contain them will be paramount to the bill’s success. I welcome the minister’s announcement of £1 million of funding for scientific research. I believe that that is essential not only to reassure the public but to ensure that we have sustainable growth in fish farming. In conclusion, I support the bill at stage 1. I look forward to seeing work on the bill continue over the coming weeks and months to create a strong framework for the sector.

17. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made since November 2012 on implementing the recommendations of the languages working group report. (S4O-01845)

During a Scotland’s Futures Forum event in the Parliament, there was a presentation by a primary school on what the timetable looked like, and it was extraordinary. It involved three languages—

Children would come in speaking English and learning Gaelic, and by primary 7 they would have done Spanish and French as well, which is really impressive. When will we have a report back on the pilots? Are any of the schools involved in the Highlands and Islands region?

1. To ask the Scottish Government how it is encouraging people to purchase fresh, local produce. (S4O-01819)

I thank the cabinet secretary for his reply. What action is the Government taking to spread a culture of belief in buying local produce? Such produce is often perceived as having an expensive price tag, but in fact it can be the most economical way of feeding a family. Action in this area could be processed through the education system or could involve other aspects of the buying and use of local produce.

I will use the time that I have in this stage 1 debate to reflect on the difficult choices that the cabinet secretary and the Government have faced in preparing the budget. I am mindful of Professor David Bell’s conclusion in his report on the budget back in September: “The Cabinet secretary is largely constrained by the settlement from the UK government, which in turn reflects its policy towards the UK’s current fiscal deficit.” In the face of those constraints, and as I said in the Finance Committee debate on the draft budget before Christmas, I fully support the cabinet secretary’s budget for 2013-14 and the choices that he has made. We do not have the flexibility of normal countries as our budget is handed to us from on high. For example, restoring money to our colleges would mean cuts elsewhere—cuts that others have failed to outline or propose. In many instances, the choice that we have is Sophie’s choice, where money that could be used in so many different areas cannot be allocated to them all. I was pleased to see the cabinet secretary’s thoughtful and considered written response to the Finance Committee’s report, which was debated in the chamber on 20 December, as the response answered many of the points that were raised in our report. I was particularly heartened by the information that the Government outlined on the economic impact of public sector investment in next generation broadband, with almost 14,000 indirect jobs being created between 2013 and 2028. That might seem a long period of time, but the ambition is welcome. As a Highlands and Islands representative, I very much welcome the cabinet secretary’s recognition of the need to deliver improved connectivity in areas where next generation speeds are not yet possible. A reliable broadband service in the Highlands and Islands is the greatest gift that the budget could deliver to the region, as it would open up opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises that are currently at a disadvantage due to their geographic location. It is no use having superfast broadband in Kilmarnock if Kiltarlity does not even have a dial-up service. The Government’s commitment to all parts of Scotland is to be lauded. I was also glad to hear, in response to recommendations that were made by the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee, more details of the work that the Government is undertaking on public procurement. As Jim and Margaret Cuthbert attested to in their evidence to the committee, Germany’s strategy of breaking down larger contracts into smaller chunks to enable small and medium-sized enterprises to bid for them is eminently sensible. Given the preponderance of SMEs in the Scottish economy, I am keen for the Government to continue to consider the idea as part of its bid to make the most of what we have. As a member of the Finance Committee, which agreed its report on the budget, I hoped to see the helpful and constructive tone of our evidence-taking sessions extend to the chamber. I think that, in taking evidence from various organisations and other committees, every member of the committee was acutely aware of the difficult decisions that are being faced in these difficult times. I am convinced that the cabinet secretary has produced the best possible deal for Scotland, but I look forward to hearing positive, constructive and costed suggestions from the Opposition parties on how they would propose to improve it.

8. To ask the Scottish Government how schools, colleges and universities are promoting Scottish literature. (S4O-01676)

I thank the minister for his response, but does he agree that it is a bit of a travesty that there is only one chair of Scottish literature in Scottish universities?

Although I am a member of the Finance Committee now, I was not a member when it heard evidence on employability. However, as other members have attested to, employability ties in with many other issues across our constituencies—not the least of which is multiple deprivation. Some people may think that areas of multiple deprivation are located only in urban areas and that regions such as the Highlands and Islands are somewhat immune from its worst effects. That could not be further from the truth. As the Government’s Scottish index of multiple deprivation shows, Caithness, Ross-shire, Inverness, the Western Isles, Argyll and Bute and Orkney—to name but a few—all contain data zones that have been identified as being among the most deprived parts of Scotland. That becomes more alarming when we consider that the data zones in rural Scotland often cover very large areas that perhaps mask even more acute problems in certain towns and villages. Although the Government has produced its own SIMD data map, which is useful for examining the issue, Holyrood magazine recently highlighted a Google map that had been overlaid with the SIMD data and which provides an easier snapshot of deprivation. I cannot recommend it highly enough to colleagues. A key message that came out of the evidence sessions, and for which I have much sympathy, is that it is important to place employability in the wider context. As others have emphasised in today’s debate, employability is not about getting people into just any job, but is about finding the right job for the right person and helping to make it as easy as possible for long-term benefits to be accrued by, and confidence to be instilled in, people who may have been looking for a job for some time. In my opinion, that must mean a strong focus on the small and medium-sized enterprise sector. In my experience—both as an employee of small businesses and as an employer—the trust, responsibility and camaraderie that are gained through working for a small business can be worth their weight in gold to employees. I believe that Highlands and Islands Enterprise was right to point to its work with Nigg Skills Academy and the Social Enterprise Academy in helping to establish learning and employment opportunities in the Highlands and Islands, as well as to its work on supporting the region’s small businesses that hope to grow. Employment can take on many different guises—it is not always the direct Monday-to-Friday, 9-to-5 route—and it is vital that we support those from every possible angle. However, I acknowledge the issues that have been raised by the Federation of Small Businesses, whose evidence pointed out that small businesses often recruit on an informal or personal basis rather than as part of any national scheme. In addition, many employers in my region employ seasonally, which adds another layer of complexity to the debate. The FSB has also recently provided further evidence on the barriers that small businesses in the Highlands and Islands face. It is an extraordinarily good read that highlights some of the problems that we face in overcoming such barriers. In conclusion, I thank every organisation that gave evidence on employability to the committee last year, and I thank the then members of the committee for their work. It is vital that Parliament continue to examine issues that affect communities across the country where, through our actions and attention, we can bring about the necessary change. I will add a final comment on Hanzala Malik’s criticism of the Government for challenging the colleges. We cannot have change without change. From evidence that I have received, I can say that young people have been let down by those self-same colleges, so we have to investigate that and make change happen. That is part of what we need to achieve here; I hope that we do it.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what recent representations it has made to BBC Scotland regarding job losses in its Highlands and Islands service. (S4O-01646)

I agree with the ambition that the minister clearly stated, but does he agree that deleting the senior reporter post in BBC Radio Highland does not allow for a truly nationwide service such as he described?

As a member of the Finance Committee, I was pleased that the entire committee was able to agree on its report, as that was not the case last year. As our budget from Westminster continues to shrink annually, the cabinet secretary’s job correspondingly gets that bit tougher, and it is vital that the whole chamber reflects the cross-party support at committee level for the Government’s efforts to do the best for Scotland. The committee took evidence from a range of witnesses, some of whom were supportive of the budget and some of whom raised concerns. I am glad that the committee took the full range of views on board and produced a balanced, thoughtful report that provides praise and constructive suggestions in equal measure, in a manner that will hopefully aid the cabinet secretary in his efforts. Although I recognise that this is a national budget, I want to take some time to lay out what the budget means for the Highlands and Islands. The cabinet secretary has done a good job in doing what he can, given the limitations on the Government. It is becoming intolerable that, when we talk about having control of our budget and the tax system and about raising our own funds and deciding how best to invest, other members in other parties seem to think that that is a crazy idea. The ability to do that will ensure that we can make a difference to the economy of this country. To pick up on a couple of specific points, I welcome the £32.4 million for Highlands and Islands Airports Limited—that is the 10 small regional airports as well as Dundee airport. Those small airports provide an essential service and provide jobs and an infrastructure that would otherwise be absent. They therefore contribute to economic growth.

Sorry—I beg your pardon, Presiding Officer. The continuing regeneration of our island populations, as confirmed by the recent census results that were released this week, is undoubtedly due in part to that type of support. The Scottish Government’s funding of the air discount scheme also ensures that those services remain affordable for most of our constituents. An important issue that was examined by my committee as well as the Rural Affairs, Climate Change and Environment Committee and the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee was the Government’s stated commitment to “deliver digital connectivity across the whole of Scotland by 2020”. We heard from the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, which correctly pointed out the frustrations in the Highlands and Islands at the lack of availability of fast and reliable broadband, which can inhibit economic development. Investment in that, particularly in geographically remote areas, can be viewed as contributing to economic growth. It is vital that all of Scotland has reliable internet access, and I once again echo the committee’s request for the Government to examine the need to prioritise that. In the time that I have left, I will reflect on our approach to economic policy. There has been ample discussion in the chamber of the need for and concentration on economic growth, as if that on its own is a silver bullet for the tough times that ordinary families face. However, we should remember that, during the early years of the new Labour Government, economic growth also meant a growing gap between the richest and poorest in our society. A number of witnesses who gave evidence to our committee said that the increase in the health budget made the rest of the budget difficult for the cabinet secretary. However, in other reports that have not focused on economic growth, good health has been a priority, so we should recognise that investment. However, we should begin to rebalance our ideas about what constitutes a strong economy. An economic approach that is based on the financial sector, where money begets money with no discernible communal benefit, seems to be neither strong nor sustainable. Although it is more than a year old, I recommend to members—as Patrick Harvie did in the budget debate last year—the Carnegie UK Trust’s report “More Than GDP: Measuring What Matters”, which makes a far more thorough and eloquent case for such an approach. I commend the budget, and look forward to seeing it help ordinary Scots in these tough times.

Given that there were no compulsory redundancies, is the minister surprised by the threat of strike action? Striking on the weekends in the run-up to Christmas is more likely to have a negative impact on the public’s opinion of the RMT and will therefore be counterproductive.

8. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made with the development of crofting townships. (S4O-01553)

Does the minister agree that the Crofting Commission and HIE need to have a close working relationship to further the interests of the crofting community, particularly in the light of the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010 and the fact that some notices of eviction are being served?

As a member of the Finance Committee, I am pleased to have the opportunity to comment on the bill at stage 1. I echo the comments of my fellow Finance Committee members in agreeing with the general principles of the bill but with caveats. The two provisions that have gained the most attention and that the Finance Committee’s report is most vocal in questioning are the absolute exemption that is proposed for communication with some members of the royal family and the extension of coverage to organisations that receive public money. Currently, a public interest case must be made for the disclosure of communication between certain members of the royal household and the Government, and I cannot see how removing a public interest test is itself in the public interest. In addition, the committee heard during its evidence taking that the absolute exemption would, in fact, create a new anomaly, due to the fact that the EU directive on environmental information contains no specific exemptions for communications with the royal family. As the equivalent measure that was introduced at Westminster was rushed through that Parliament in 2010 with little scrutiny, perhaps the rest of the UK should bring its legislation into line with Scotland’s, rather than Scotland regressing to come into line with the rest of the UK. An equally pressing concern relates to how the public are able to scrutinise private companies that are awarded public contracts. It is vital that the public be able to find out how and where their money is being spent. Otherwise, we risk FOI avoidance sitting alongside tax avoidance in being a legal, yet ethically wrong, practice. I acknowledge that the Government has said that it intends to examine extending coverage at some point, but I consider it a matter of urgency that arm’s-length external organisations—of which there are roughly 130—be designated under the existing FOI legislation. I agree with Willie Rennie’s suggestion that we are worse off than we were 10 years ago as a result of the creation of the ALEOs removing an enormous amount of public expenditure into organisations that are exempt. The public have a right to be able to follow the public pound, and I suggest that, at some point, somewhere, there should be a recommendation that any organisation that picks up public money should offer up the information at its own hand. Because we have to challenge and go through the freedom of information legislation to get information, there is an assumption that something dodgy is going on and that the companies have something to hide. However, if the information was put on websites or made available to the public more easily and, I hesitate to say, at less cost to everybody concerned, there would be less need for the legislation. I back the general principles of the bill but, once again, state my preference for changes to be made when it returns to the Parliament for its second stage.

Does the land review group intend its meetings with land action Scotland to be undertaken in a similar format to the ones that it has had with Scottish Land & Estates, Community Land Scotland, the Development Trusts Association Scotland and the Scottish Tenant Farmers Association?

2. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking on breaches of fish farm regulations in relation to the overuse of chemical treatments for sea lice infestations. (S4O-01387)

Would the Scottish Government consider a moratorium on new fish farms until the current farmers resolve sea-lice issues?

As the deputy convener of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I am pleased to have the opportunity to comment on the women’s employment summit, which I was fortunate enough to attend last month. I am glad that the role of women in the workplace and in wider society has returned to the chamber for debate, although I am saddened to acknowledge the continuing need for such debates. We have come very far in a very short space of time, but a lot of work remains to be done and I know that the minister Angela Constance and the Government are determined to take that forward. It is important that we lower—and eventually eliminate—the barriers and ceilings faced by women in the workplace, particularly given the recession’s disproportionate impact on them. After all, according to statistics, women are more likely to work part time and to be more affected by Westminster’s welfare reforms. As I have done in the past, I draw the chamber’s attention to the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s report “Tapping all our Talents”, which sets out a strategy for increasing the number of women working in STEM areas. Produced by a working group that included the inimitable Dame Jocelyn Bell Burnell, the report is a searing indictment of the barriers that are faced by women who wish to study and work in those areas and sets out in stark detail just how big a barrier gender can be to entering certain occupations. On 2 August, “Women’s Hour” on BBC Radio 4 featured a discussion with Christine Ashton, who has been named as the 12th most influential woman in IT in the UK. She advertised service manager posts, hoping to attract applications from women, but did not receive any. The show-stopper was this: when she readvertised the posts, having dropped the salary by £20,000, many more women applied. We can leave a debate on the issue of reverse psychology for another day, but I think that that anecdote indicates the scale of the problem. I believe that women will go into politics when women encourage other women to become involved. There is no doubt that they have the skills, experience, ability and talent but without the confidence to apply for posts or to get politically involved or involved in communities, women will remain reluctant. Some of those experiences must be factored into the correction strategy, and I hope that women will inform that process. In response to Margo MacDonald’s point, I note that in the “Women’s Hour” discussion Christine Ashton said that women comprise 17 per cent of the IT workforce in the UK and 18 per cent of that workforce in Europe. It is clear that this is not just a Scottish problem. However, we should share things as widely as we can, and I was pleased to hear the minister say that that was one of her ambitions. Members across the chamber will agree that actions speak louder than words. As someone who is always happy to speak on equality matters, I am especially heartened by the Scottish Government’s determination to pick up the baton and put in place a strategy that will complement its work in so many key areas. In the 21st century, gender, age, ethnicity and disability should not prevent individuals from fulfilling their potential, which we must ensure that they do.

Tapadh leibh, Presiding Officer. Unfortunately, I cannot replicate the language skills of my party colleagues the minister, Dave Thompson and John Finnie, all of whom are far more proficient in Gaelic than I am. However, as a fellow MSP for the Highlands and Islands, I know how important the continuing encouragement and development of Gaelic as a vital part of the nation’s identity are. Last weekend, Gaelic singer Julie Fowlis followed her magnificent work for the film “Brave”, which has been referred to, with a stunning performance in front of a worldwide audience to herald the beginning of Scotland’s Ryder cup 2014 preparations. She was brought up in North Uist in a Gaelic-speaking community but, like others, she was not a fluent Gaelic speaker. She benefited first from the fèis movement and she went on to be a student of the language at Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, which is Scotland’s Gaelic college in Skye. As with many lesser-spoken languages, the spread of Gaelic has been inhibited as English and other languages have become the lingua franca. Fewer than 60,000 Gaelic speakers, who are concentrated in the Western Isles, Argyll and Bute and the Highlands, are estimated to remain in Scotland. They represent just over 1 per cent of the population. That must be a concern, given that, in comparison, more than 20 per cent of the population in Wales can speak Welsh. If we are to witness a dramatic upturn in the number of Gaelic speakers across Scotland, we require a comprehensive and holistic approach to be taken by all the agencies whose remit is the furtherance of Gaelic. I particularly welcome the focus on early years and education in the national plan’s key outcomes. Evidence of success from that comes from my neighbour, nine-year-old Ruaraidh, who attends the local Gaelic school. He said: “We don’t learn Gaelic, we live it—like the way you get to speak English”. Promoters of Gaelic-medium education now focus on the benefits of bilingualism rather than the direct benefits of Gaelic, but we must never lose sight of the links to the past, people and places. We can think of all the effort that goes into curating artefacts that are of historical value. How much more precious is a living language? Common sense dictates that we must continue to focus on Gaelic-medium teaching in schools or at least on facilitating Gaelic lessons to maintain the language. The role that artists and musicians such as Julie Fowlis play in promoting Gaelic is another reminder of how important the language is. Others acknowledge its importance. A local teacher who assumed that two Polish immigrants had arrived for an English as a foreign language course was amazed when they said that their English was fine and that they were interested in signing up to learn Gaelic. We must never underestimate others. Scots sometimes have to be convinced by somebody else that something is a really good idea. I suspect that, across Europe, we would get massive support for our plan. In Europe, there is a determination to retain languages such as Gaelic, and we must endorse that. I found out earlier today that the last speaker of the Cromarty dialect, Bobby Hogg, had died aged 92, removing one of the more colourful threads of Scotland’s linguistic tapestry. I sincerely hope that the plan that we have will prevent similar headlines about the last Gaelic speaker in the years to come. As Ruaraidh said, we have to live it.

As with any debate on a complex issue, it is easy to get tangled up in the process and the minutiae of the proposals. Although those are both undoubtedly important areas to investigate, we must also bear in mind the overarching aims of the CAP so that we can best direct its reform, and how CAP impacts on the communities it supports. The European Commission sets out a number of factors that have taken on “a greater importance” over recent years with regard to CAP, including improving the quality of Europe’s food, providing better animal health and welfare conditions, being environmentally sound, guaranteeing food safety and looking after rural society, all at a minimal cost to the EU budget. Each and every objective I have listed immediately brings to mind an often-forgotten, but vital, area of our agricultural sector—namely, crofting. Crofting is important not just for its economic impact, but for its role in maintaining communities in the most remote areas of rural Scotland. There are approximately 18,000 crofts all over the north of Scotland, housing approximately 33,000 people—a significant proportion of the population of the Highlands and Islands, and an even more significant proportion of the rural population of the region. Without crofting, many communities would suffer from depopulation, not least due to the numerous second jobs held by crofters to supplement their income. An August 2011 report from Rural Analysis Associates emphasised that point, describing the current situation as approaching a “tipping point” beyond which depopulation would continue unabated. Such a situation would obviously be detrimental to Scottish society and to Scottish agriculture, as it would leave vast swathes of Scottish agricultural land unused and unmanaged. For many years, crofters have been particularly dependent on income from environmental schemes. I understand that Scotland currently receives one of the lowest rates of pillar 2 payments in Europe. Just as crofters are dependent on environmental income, so too is our wider economy. Tourism also depends on being able to utilise that environment and managed landscape to sell Scotland to the world. Through the Crofting Reform (Scotland) Act 2010, the Scottish Government has shown its commitment to crofting and we now need to make sure that crofting gets the recognition and financial support through the CAP that will allow it to develop and flourish. The care and expertise afforded by crofters to their livestock are of vital importance to Scotland as a whole. For example, Caithness beef—and eggs, I should say to Mr Gibson—and Hebridean and Shetland lamb originated in crofting husbandry and are some of the many products that Scotland would not be able to proudly call its own were it not for the work of our crofting community. With the right support and investment, there will be yet more opportunities to develop niche and artisan food companies across the Highlands and Islands. Additionally, the quality store animals that are reared on crofts form a critical part of the supply chain for our lowland finishers. Without them, the food and drink sector would be less sustainable, as crofting is the first brick in the quality wall. It is crystal clear that Scotland’s crofters play an important role in securing all of the European Commission’s objectives for the CAP. It is therefore vital that CAP reform makes that role easier to perform. Currently, the vast majority of direct payments to Scottish agriculture are directed to the east and south-west of Scotland. By comparison, very little money goes to the beautiful—but difficult to farm—Highlands and Islands, which almost universally fall under the banners of less favoured areas or areas of natural constraint. The money afforded to LFAs and ANCs, which mostly contain crofting communities, really makes the difference. Without it, many crofters would find the marginal income that they make from their activities disappear altogether, which would bring us even closer to the tipping point that I mentioned. It is therefore vital that the cabinet secretary continues to push for the best deal possible and ensures that no farms or crofts are left out of those designations. I close by once again stressing the importance of crofting to our agricultural and food and drink sectors, the wider economy and the survival of our most remote communities. I trust that the cabinet secretary will continue to represent crofting interests at the highest level.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what assistance it can give to families with children where some family members are required to leave the country due to their immigration status. (S4O-01278)

Can the minister confirm that children and young people in education are supported by their school in situations in which some members of their family are required to leave the country due to immigration status?

What recent engagement has the Scottish Government had with key organisations in the crofting sector?

I congratulate Christine Grahame on securing the debate, which is timely, as it was announced on Monday that the great Polish map has been awarded listed status. The map is undoubtedly worthy of protection, and I am delighted that future generations will be able to admire the attention to detail in that unique structure, which looks extraordinary. The use of gravity-driven water to recreate our rivers and lochs is truly magnificent. I am sure that all members who will speak in the debate will concur on the map’s historic importance, not only as a feat of architecture and a reminder of the sacrifices that Polish soldiers made during world war two, but as a symbol of the long-standing links between Poland and Scotland that were forged in that era and which have remained strong ever since. I want to concentrate on that connection, which has continued to the present day. A number of years ago, Ross and Cromarty District Council twinned with the region that is known as the “Polish Highlands”. Sometimes people wonder whether civic twinning has any real purpose, but that twinning did have real purpose for our education—we learned a number of things. We learned about the thousands of Scots who went to Poland and settled there in the previous two centuries, and about a pipe band from there, which marched all over Ross and Cromarty on several occasions. Its bagpipes were fantastic and they looked quite unlike ours. They had no tartan, but they were made of sheepskin. That stayed in my mind. The band played as beautifully as ours do. All of Scotland has benefited from the special relationship with Poland—I think particularly of the Polish food shops that can now be found in any city in Scotland and our supermarkets’ dedication to providing Polish produce. The Highlands and Islands in particular have attracted a large number of Poles. As late as 2004, the Highlands and Islands were threatened with yet further depopulation, but the situation has changed dramatically. Inverness is still one of Europe’s fastest-growing cities. That growth is concurrent with economic regeneration and is attributable in part to Inverness’s active and dynamic Polish community, which now forms roughly 10 per cent of its population. Across the Highlands and Islands, approximately 69 per cent of all immigrants come from Poland, which shows the strong ties that exist between our two nations. The mutual benefit of those ties is evident. They contribute hugely to civic life in Inverness and the surrounding region. I was privileged to have the chance to recognise that when I was able to invite Zosia Wierzbowicz-Fraser, the chair of the Inverness Polish Association, to be my local hero at the opening of Parliament last summer. Among other activities, Zosia has organised translation services and accommodation, and the Inverness Polish Association has acted as a welcoming group that helps Poles to settle and to feel welcome in the city. In contributing so much to society, Zosia is typical of the Polish community in Scotland. I am sure that all of us in this chamber recognise the value to future generations of growing up in towns, cities and villages in which many cultures are known and celebrated, and in which an awareness of our place in the world and that of others helps to inculcate a sense of internationalism and global citizenry. I am sure that that will be all the more beneficial when Scotland regains its place in the community of nations. Once again, I welcome the continuing restoration of the map.

Does Mr Macintosh agree that one element of business growth is confidence? In fact, it is declared endlessly in reports by any business organisation as being the main element in what allows a good business to grow. The only area—including Wales—that is showing business confidence, is Scotland. Nothing can happen without that confidence. A bank will not invest in a small business unless it shows confidence and Scotland is a nation of small businesses. Does Mr Macintosh agree that confidence is the key element?

The CBI is the smallest represented business organisation in Scotland, because of the size of business that it represents. Every other business organisation sees the situation differently.

Does the member acknowledge that, at the time of the development at Sullom Voe and the need for houses in Shetland, an arrangement was made with the Westminster Government, which only recently stopped paying the support grant to the Scottish Government?

I suspect that the minister answered this question in his statement, to a certain extent. Will he confirm that, in tendering the northern isles and upcoming Clyde and Hebrides ferry services, he is taking the same approach as that of previous administrations, and that he is obliged to do so under EU law, no matter how much he likes or dislikes it.

I congratulate Ken Macintosh on bringing this debate to the chamber. I am delighted to have the opportunity to speak in favour of the motion and in favour of Oxfam’s vital work in the area. As members know, it is common for us to receive briefings or points of view from interested parties on the debates that we have in the chamber, but it is uncommon for those contributions to be unanimous in their tone. The overwhelming and sincere support for the humankind index from groups across Scottish civic society is welcome and telling. For too long, Scotland and the developed world as a whole have relied on GDP figures to paint a picture of a prosperous society. However, as Oxfam has succinctly remarked, GDP is a “consumption-oriented and distribution-blind measure”. Sadly, a high GDP and endemic and crippling poverty are not mutually exclusive but in fact often go hand in hand, as the growing inequality of the past 30 years in the United Kingdom has shown. A reliance on GDP figures and purely economic statistics by policy makers can harm the common weal, rather than helping to ameliorate society’s scars. The Oxfam humankind index is specifically designed to avoid those statistical pitfalls in measuring the health of our society. To Oxfam’s credit, it has gone the extra mile in reaching out to as many parts of the community as possible. It has involved those on lower incomes who, unfortunately, feel disengaged with the political process and asked them what really matters in their life. We can learn a lot from that method of consultation and participation, particularly from the efforts that Oxfam has made to accommodate participants through provision of childcare and expenses. It should come as no surprise that the index has shown that, for most people, good health, strong communities and a healthy local environment are the priorities. Perhaps the lasting contribution of the index will be that policy makers such as us will reach decisions on the basis of how policies will help to achieve those laudable aims, rather than purely on the basis of the effect on the nation’s finances. In our future policy deliberations, it is vital that we use the humankind index. We have been provided with a tool to help deliver social justice for Scotland, so I hope that we can use it. I support the motion.

As the cabinet secretary explained in his statement, the set-up of the Highlands and Islands further education regional board will be slightly different from the set-up in other regions, with the board sitting under the UHI court. Will the cabinet secretary explain how autonomy of decision making will be guaranteed for the board?

How will the Scottish Government showcase the Gaelic language and culture for the year of homecoming 2014 and beyond?

I declare an interest as someone with a great many years’ experience in the tourism and hospitality industry in the Highlands. I pay tribute to those who have spoken before me, who have highlighted a number of Scotland’s attractions, taking us on a kind of verbal tour around the country. Tourism is hugely important to Scotland as a whole, and comparatively it plays an even greater part in the mixed economy of the Highlands and Islands. That is a part of Scotland with natural beauty and an incredible landscape, which I am sure will feature strongly in the special promotion of the year of natural Scotland, next year. Mary Scanlon has left the chamber, but I must take issue with some of the things that she said about the Sutherland way. We have to be respectful of the environment that we have in Scotland. We have to be smart about recognising the areas that need to have cafes or facilities, but we also have to recognise the special, wild nature of the land that we have. There are three identified geoparks in Scotland, and they are all in the Highlands and Islands. All of them make specific requests in terms of relevant development. The idea that the north-west Sutherland way should have a string of facilities along it makes my—well, I will say simply that that is wild Scotland. Scotland attracts visitors from across the world and, in the past couple of years, a growing number from across the United Kingdom. Those visitors help to maintain 25,000 jobs across 3,000 businesses in my region and bring £1.2 billion every year from the region into the economy, and it is the importance of the economy that we are talking about. By talking about Glasgow attracting conferences, Hanzala Malik reminded me that, on 9 September 1997, which was only two days before the extraordinary vote for devolution, Glasgow hosted the annual congress of the American travel trade, with several thousand delegates. The keynote speaker was Mrs Thatcher, who took the time on “Newsnight” to tell Scots that they should vote no the following Thursday. However, we are grateful that Glasgow has the facilities to take that size of conference. Scotland is famous for its hospitality and its friendly people. To combat some of Helen Eadie’s comments, I should say that our reputation is deserved. There may be instances such as those that she talked about, but Scotland will never be perfect in everybody’s eyes. It is too easy for someone to go out and find a place that they do not like, but they do not know that, the night before, other people have had a really good time there. The spit-and-sawdust pub can offer up as great a night’s entertainment for some people as a five-star hotel can do for a different clientele, offering a different service. We have to be careful about how we decide on these matters. We also have to be helpful. Do we want to hammer a business that is probably suffering really badly? It, too, plays a part in the economy and needs help rather than poor recognition. That people recognise our hospitality and the friendliness of our people is evidenced by the extraordinarily high levels of repeat business that we achieve in Scotland generally and in the Highlands and Islands in particular. The figures are there for everyone to see. Familiar faces of people who have become addicted to holidays here appear regularly. That is still a factor of our industry. I have been in the hotel trade so long that I know the grandchildren of folk who stayed many years before. That is the legacy that we can and should build on. It is ironic, in some ways, that the industry should be sustained by such levels of repeat visits, given that employment opportunities in the industry often seem to be short-term and seasonal. There have been many changes over the years and the recent festivals that the Highlands and Islands play host to are amazing. RockNess, Loopallu and the Insider festival that was held last weekend and was attended by 1,000 people, who stayed for three or four days, might seem like small beer compared with festivals such as T in the Park, but they are right for that part of Scotland and they are due recognition. Anyone who has attended some of the smaller book festivals will know that they are hugely personal affairs, and contribute hugely to the economy. More and more are being organised outside what we choose to call the peak holiday period. Although “Brave”, the now-released Pixar animation, is clearly getting global attention, I would like to thank members who recently supported my motion on the Hansel of Film, which came from Shetland and takes the story of Shetland and small film-makers around the United Kingdom. It is perhaps not the same in terms of marketing, but it is just as important and such projects often capture the imagination of visitors when they come here. Tourism is an industry that does not stand alone. Like steel making and shipbuilding, it depends on all other sectors in order to flourish. Local authorities have much to contribute by keeping the infrastructure and public facilities open and in good order. The education of our children, especially in music and language, has an enormous role to play. Crofting and fishing are among our main attractions and we should never forget that folk on holiday love to watch folk at work.

I was pleased to sign Jamie Hepburn’s motion and I congratulate him on bringing the debate to the chamber. As I am interested in the work of the cross-party group on human rights, I welcome the opportunity to discuss the urgent need for a practical yet far-reaching arms trade treaty. The panoply of statistics that my colleague Jamie Hepburn cited in his motion and his speech is truly harrowing. When we consider that my home town, Ullapool, has fewer inhabitants than the number of people who die every day from armed violence, one gets a sense of the enormity of this human crisis. There is little regulation of the arms trade. It is ludicrous that weapons as devastating as grenade launchers and serious assault rifles are subject to lax control at best, while the trade in harmless commodities—such as the aforementioned bananas—is strictly regulated globally. That is madness. Those weapons are not used only by countries that are officially at war, but are in many cases used to suppress human rights within countries, with two out of every three people who are killed by armed violence dying in countries that are not at war. That cycle of violence has obvious human costs, but what must also be borne in mind is the social cost of such needless conflict. Nations at war with themselves, whether it be over territory, resources or another struggle, will never be able to heal and to develop. An unregulated arms trade perpetuates endemic poverty across the world, harms democratic debate and tears apart communities. For many issues, the treatment can be worse than the disease, but Amnesty’s proposals for an effective arms trade treaty are plausible. Instead of imposing a punitive weapons ban, it proposes a weapons transfer system that would prohibit the sale of weapons that are likely to be used for violations of human rights or international law. It defies belief that any nation could oppose a treaty with such laudable aims that, despite preconceptions, clearly does not call for an outright ban. The support of the UK Government and the defence community, one of the world’s major arms exporters, for such a treaty shows the impact that the lobbying of MSPs and others across civil society can have on this issue. I urge everybody in the chamber to continue to press the UK Government to hold firm to its line on this first step towards minimising the human cost of armed conflict. This is not some esoteric debate, but a subject on which lives and communities depend, and we must never lose sight of that.

As a member of the Equal Opportunities Committee, I welcome the opportunity to comment on the vital work that is ahead of us to ensure that we remove as many barriers as possible for women seeking to enter their chosen career. I welcome, too, the minister’s announcement of the summit in September, which is perfect timing. It is not just unemployment among women that should worry us, although that has doubled since early 2008. We should be equally concerned about the type of work that women undertake. Recent figures suggest that just over 40 per cent of employed women are employed part time, compared with roughly 13 per cent of men. In many cases, that is because flexible working policies have not been fully implemented by organisations, forcing those with young families to seek reduced hours in order to balance their work and home lives. That can have a knock-on effect on career progression and family income, which is not healthy for the economy or for society. Linked to the issue of career progression is career choice. The Royal Society of Edinburgh released a report entitled “Tapping All Our Talents” in April this year, which details a possible future strategy to boost the number of women in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, and halt the current situation whereby, unbelievably, 73 per cent of female STEM graduates drop out of the sector, which is an issue that we must investigate. The report also presses women to be more proactive in seeking out opportunities, to take risks and to step outside their comfort zone. I urge all of the members present to read that report and to consider how best to take on board its constructive recommendations for stopping that brain drain. Equally striking is the disparity between economically inactive men and economically inactive women who have chosen to look after their families. Currently, 31 per cent of economically inactive women fall into that category as opposed to 5 per cent of men—those figures may be due to the continuing discrepancy between maternity and paternity leave, or they may be due to trouble accessing childcare. As the Minister for Youth Employment mentioned earlier, the Scottish Government is beginning to tackle the issue of childcare by increasing the number of free nursery education hours from 475 to 600. That will make a huge difference to a number of women—certainly in my ken. Putting in place family-friendly structures through the national parenting strategy must continue to be one of our priorities, as must mitigating the disproportionate impact on women of Westminster welfare reform as best we can within the current constitutional parameters. Women at all levels face challenges. Currently, there is a 10.7 per cent pay gap between men and women in full-time employment across Scotland. That gap is exacerbated by a glass ceiling whereby only 36 per cent of higher-level jobs are held by women. Indeed, only 35 per cent of the members of this Parliament are female. Like my colleague Shona Robison last week, I find it hard to believe that “there are not equal numbers of ... suitable male and female candidates” across the parties, and even harder to believe “that the best candidate just happened to be male on so many occasions.”—[Official Report, 14 June 2012; c 10062.] I encourage all members to give this issue some serious thought. Although society has taken some large strides in the past few decades to level the playing field, as always there is more that can be done.

During last week’s debate on reform of the common fisheries policy, I raised the issue of the Shetland box, the retention of which has not been explicitly confirmed by the European Commission in its reform package. Does the minister know whether the Shetland box is to be retained? If it is not, will the minister support its retention?

I welcome the debate and congratulate Liz Smith on bringing it to the chamber. I am grateful for the opportunity to pay tribute to the crucial work that is undertaken by every mountain rescue team in Scotland, particularly with so many being operational in my region, the Highlands and Islands. I have occasionally seen team members as they have come back from a successful search and I know the work that they put in and how exhausted they can be after a search. Success is often theirs, and I have seen that too. As anyone who has climbed a Corbett or scaled a Munro knows, the beauty of our natural landscape viewed from atop one of our peaks is breathtaking. For helping those who fall foul of the elements in that pursuit, our mountain rescue team volunteers deserve our thanks. In 2010, the Scottish mountain rescue team volunteers went out more than 500 times, frequently contending with rugged terrain and often in poor weather conditions or when it was dark. In total, volunteers were deployed for 26,000 hours in 2010, a figure that is made all the more impressive by their year-round commitment to their voluntary role. The Lochaber mountain rescue team in my region attended 72 of those incidents, occasionally in conjunction with other teams, displaying a blend of professionalism and commitment to community service that is an example to us all. It must be remembered that we have a part to play in ensuring the continuation of such a vital voluntary service. The Scottish Government has given £339,000 to the Mountain Rescue Committee of Scotland for 2011-12, increasing the general funding stream by £12,000 and providing a one-off grant of £12,000 towards communications equipment. That funding was welcomed on BBC Radio Scotland on Saturday morning by Jonathan Hart, the chair of the Mountain Rescue Committee, who hailed the support and the tremendous opportunities afforded to mountain rescue teams by the move to a single Scottish police force, while maintaining strong local connections. I was particularly pleased to hear him say that he sees the service working more effectively rather than less. Responsibility for mountain safety must also be shared by the public at large. The Mountain Rescue Committee’s 2010 report points out that “Summer Hill walking is responsible for more incidents than any other mountain activity.” Therefore, although those of us who are not into winter climbing or rock climbing might think that they are the only activities that affect the mountain rescue teams, the majority of work is caused by people who just set out for a walk, sometimes, as I have seen, in high-heeled shoes. The 2010 report also says: “One third of all mountaineering incidents result from a slip or trip.” Although it would be impossible to permanently eliminate human error and abnormal weather conditions, we can reduce the number of accidents by continuing to educate ourselves about how best to prepare and how best to take care of ourselves while we are enjoying Scotland’s hills and mountains. I hope that, with continuing support from the Government and the public, and the well-earned publicising of their work, we can help our mountain rescue teams to go from strength to strength. I support the motion.

I suspect that I am going to put the opposite case from that put by Margaret McDougall. As a member for a region with a real dependency on the fishing industry, I am pleased to support the motion. With fish accounting for 59 per cent of all food exported from Scotland and £500 million-worth of fish landed by Scottish vessels in 2011, the value of the industry to Scotland’s economy cannot be overstated. The common fisheries policy has failed to work for Scotland and for Scotland’s fishing industry. The reforms, as currently proposed, will continue that unfortunate trend to the detriment of many of the communities in my region. One of the most important principles of the European Union is that of subsidiarity: namely, that decisions should be taken at the most appropriate and most local level possible. However, that has never been the case with fisheries. The blanket approach of the European Commission to fisheries suffocates the ability of regions and nations to adapt to their own particular circumstances and needs, and endangers the very conservation that the common fisheries policy is intended to promote. The difficulties posed by the imposition of centrally decided targets and quotas have only been exacerbated by the lack of a distinct Scottish voice at the decision table, and that has resulted in our interests being traded away by successive UK Governments. The inability of the Scottish Government, on behalf of Scotland as an independent nation, to directly influence the policy within the Council of Ministers puts us at a unique disadvantage. It is an absolute scandal that, while we remain gagged, ministers from landlocked nations such as Slovakia and Hungary are able to directly influence policies that have a negligible impact on their economies, but a potentially devastating impact on ours. The proposal to introduce a compulsory quota trading system, nebulously called “transferable fishing concessions”, is just one of the many proposals that should give us cause for concern. The opportunity for wealthy companies to use their financial means to purchase fishing rights from hard-pressed fishermen is one that we should all be wary of, particularly as it appears that no safeguards have been put in place to prevent that practice from devastating the principle of relative stability, which has, so far, held firm. Although there is a commitment to retain the 6 and 12-mile limits for coastal fisheries, the lack of any explicit reference in the proposals to retain, for example, the Shetland box—a protected coastal fisheries area of great importance to the Shetland Islands and Scotland as a whole—is of grave concern. I urge the Scottish Government to clarify the future of the Shetland box and, if the Shetland box is threatened, to do its best to protect those waters from being opened up, as the Irish did some years ago when their waters were under threat. It must be remembered that, in rural areas in particular, each industry or sector helps to support many others. A set of reforms that hurts Scottish fishing also hurts our processing industries, our food and drink sector and our tourism sector—all major employers in the Highlands and Islands and nationwide. Regardless of our constitutional views, it is in the interests of us all to push for our voice to be heard at the negotiating table, and not just with Westminster’s permission. The decision to send an unelected member of the House of Lords rather than a Scottish representative to an informal fisheries council meeting in April 2010 is just one example of party politics stepping on the toes of national interests. Surely all of us would decry that decision. For the first time, thanks to the treaty of Lisbon, the European Parliament will have a say in reforming the common fisheries policy. As a Parliament, we must work in conjunction with Scotland’s six MEPs to ensure that a strong cross-party and national voice is heard. Surely we can all unite on that for the fishing industry in Scotland, with its obvious history and heritage. I once more affirm my support for the motion and urge all MSPs to back the Government’s efforts to promote our interests in Westminster and Europe.

The member says that people must have input into how fishing is organised in their area. Does she agree that the area where most of the fishermen are and where most of the fishing is done should have a voice at the table when the discussions happen? Does she agree that that has not been the case to date?

I congratulate Colin Keir on bringing the issue, which is particularly relevant and important, forward for debate, and welcome the chance to comment on the educational work that the Royal Highland Education Trust is undertaking to promote the countryside, which is an essential component of Scotland’s cultural and economic fabric. As we have heard, the trust provides opportunities for schoolchildren across Scotland to investigate various aspects of countryside life through activities such as farm visits, school competitions and classroom talks by farmers. It has been stated that more than 15,000 children have been able to experience working farms and estates first-hand. That is a 20 per cent rise on the previous year. I think that we would all not only support the trust’s aim of sustaining that level of interaction annually by 2015 but urge it to increase that level. As always, there are lessons to be learned from the work of our neighbours. My mind is drawn to innovative efforts that are being made in Iceland, where the Alcoa Foundation has funded outdoor schoolrooms in order to make the environment in general a natural part of the curriculum. Such events and experiences have intrinsic value. They give children in urban settings the opportunity to experience rural life, albeit briefly sometimes. As part of the curriculum for excellence, they give children the opportunity to understand better where the food in their fridges and pantries originates. As a councillor, I visited Shetland during the Highlands and Islands convention, where I was privileged to hear from schoolchildren who had been introduced to crofting. It was inspirational to hear how enthusiastic they were about a sector that is often viewed as unattractive, largely because people have not experienced the satisfaction and contentment of seeing the benefits of their own work in an area as important as growing one’s own food or animal husbandry. However, the Royal Highland Education Trust does so much more than that. The food and drink sector in Scotland is truly one of our success stories: it had an £11.9 billion annual turnover in 2009, which indicates that we are well on our way to meeting our £12.5 billion target for 2017. My region, which is synonymous with world-class food and drink exports, employs some 25,900 people in that sector. That demonstrates the importance of a thriving agricultural sector to underpin the rural economy of Scotland. Many more people take part in related activities on a part-time or self-employed basis, and crofting is a popular and long-standing part of Highland life. The inclusion of crofting in any educational materials would be welcome, and would open up even more future business opportunities for our young people. I therefore encourage the trust to work in conjunction with the Crofting Commission to integrate such material into its future programmes. By showcasing to our young people the opportunities and careers that are afforded by our burgeoning food and drink industry, we not only instil a pride in Scotland’s produce but cultivate future generations of farmers, distillers and brewers to further support us in growing that sector. The Royal Highland Education Trust’s work in this field is to be encouraged. I support Colin Keir’s motion.

3. To ask the Scottish Government what progress has been made on land reform. (S4O-01061)

I thank the minister for his response. I think that I asked about land reform, but that might be for another day. What can the minister say about applications to the Scottish land fund?

With the economy growing in Ireland, the growth rate in Iceland being higher than that in Ireland and Norway’s economy being strong, does Mary Scanlon agree that that makes up an arc of prosperity?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what the outcome is of the trial of using retained staff to provide ambulance cover in the Shetland Islands. (S4O-01018)

I thank the cabinet secretary for her reply. It has, in fact, covered my supplementary, which was going to be about that model being used in other rural areas of Scotland.

I congratulate David Thompson on enlightening me and others about the Dewar report. I have lived in the Highlands for only the past 40 years rather than for 100 years, and those 100 years have been fascinating and the history is quite different in many respects from that of other parts of Scotland. Many reports and books have been written, some of which are told from a crofter’s point of view. I think that I am right in saying that there are a couple of books from that period and earlier by the Highland doctor, most of which are fairly amusing. The doctor may have had a hard time, but there were often great stories to be told, and those books probably reflect life in the Highlands better than anything. I remember reading that, at the time, if money had to be paid for a fee, it was more likely to go to the vet than to the doctor, but the vet was known to treat ringworm in children as well as in cattle. We have—thank god—moved on from those times, and much of what was in the Dewar report has come to pass. However, we still face difficulties in creating and delivering a universal health service in remote and rural Highland. We can be optimistic about two things, one of which is the future of telemedicine. Although people groan and say, “We don’t like change,” and, “Change comes hard,” we can, by enabling self-empowerment in health, face the challenge of becoming a healthy nation. Many of the health issues across the Highlands are to do with conditions that we can challenge as communities and as individuals. That is not to say that we do not need doctors, but it is possible to achieve general health in the Highlands, and there are many opportunities for us to live healthy lifestyles. In the 100 years since the Dewar report, depopulation has taken place, with occasional blips when there has been growth in large industry. For example, the oil industry in Shetland, the post-war developments in Dounreay and Caithness and the smelter in Invergordon created populations who moved there for the work. The second cause for optimism is that, in the past few years, there has been, for the first time, a genuine increase not only in the population, which has been increasing for the past 12 years, but in the birth rate. For me, that is a real signal that the Highlands have become an attractive place in which to live and work, and health and living in rural communities that are not unused to having to make things work for themselves are part of that image. There are many other services that we might consider to be universal that are not delivered to every corner. We would not expect them to be, nor should we pretend that we can do that. However, we can inspire healthy communities, and Highlands and Islands communities will generally respond positively when they are offered such opportunities. I will cite—as I have done previously in the chamber—some of the research carried out by Dr Jane Farmer at the University of the Highlands and Islands. I know that the research did not work everywhere, but where it did work we found that, where 20 people had been upset at the withdrawal of a social service—whether that was in the form of a lunch club or whatever—suddenly 60 people were doing things for themselves and increasing and looking after their own health. We know that the existence of certain regulations can be a barrier to that. I know a couple of old crofters who have been crofting all their lives and are nervous of regulation and other things with which they feel they can no longer cope. Their sheep and lifestyle are probably what keep them healthy. For the next 100 years, I would like those of us in the Highlands and Islands to consider what we, as communities, can do and how we respond to one another. That is what brings many people to live and work in the Highlands and keeps many people there. We do it really well when we get it. When the community grasps that we can be in charge of 50 per cent of our health ourselves, another report—perhaps in 50 years’ time—may provide a different reflection on the health service that we need to deliver.

9. To ask the Scottish Government what action it is taking in light of the United Kingdom Government’s decision not to renew the contract for the emergency towing vessel service in the Pentland Firth and other northern waters. (S4O-00947)

Does the minister agree with me that, to understand precisely the service that is required, it will be necessary to fully consult all the other rescue services and the maritime industries, that that would be best done by the Scottish Government and that funding should be returned from Westminster to allow that to happen?

Our big five—Scotland’s five national performing companies—with their singing, dancing, music and storytelling to gladden the heart, are things of which we ought to be incredibly proud. As with most good things, there have been ordinary folk with determination and commitment behind each of those organisations since their inception. The Scottish Orchestra, which was founded in 1891, became the Scottish National Orchestra in 1950. The youngest-ever musical director of Sadler’s Wells theatre, one Alexander Gibson from Motherwell, returned to Glasgow in 1959 to become the first Scottish principal conductor and artistic director of the orchestra—a post that he held for a remarkable 25 years. During that time, in 1962, he founded Scottish Opera, which launched with a performance of Puccini’s “Madame Butterfly” in the King’s theatre in Glasgow, to great acclaim. In 1969, Peter Darrell and Elizabeth West established Scottish Theatre Ballet in Glasgow, out of which grew Scottish Ballet and some fine performances—the most recent of which is “A Streetcar Named Desire”. I had not noticed that it was on but, thanks to Clare Adamson and the fact that we had a free night, I went to see it. If members have not seen it, their lives are missing something. In 1974, the Scottish Chamber Orchestra was founded and led by John Tunnell. In 1975, the old Theatre Royal was bought and transformed into the home of Scottish Opera and Scottish Ballet. I mention all that because it is fairly recent, relative to Scotland’s history. It all happened in the past 60 years, and the companies are growing still. For almost a century, the debate about whether we needed a national theatre rumbled on in Scotland. Then, the National Theatre—the other National Theatre—opened on the South Bank in London and the debate went quiet. We might have looked south, but that theatre in London did not feel to us as if it was our national theatre and it rarely looked north or toured in Scotland. In 1995, the National Theatre of Scotland—the theatre without walls—was born. There was a huge debate in Scotland about it at the time, but the right decision was taken because it has brought theatre to people throughout Scotland who otherwise would not have been reached. With great originality, Vicky Featherstone, the director, launched the new National Theatre with several theatrical pieces called “Home”. None of those used conventional theatre spaces, but used places such as the old glass factory in Wick, a shed in an industrial estate in Evanton, an empty shop in Stornoway, a high-rise flat in Aberdeen and Edinburgh airport. There must have been one in Glasgow, but I cannot remember where it was. The National Theatre of Scotland is holding a “mirror up to nature”, as Shakespeare said, and doing what theatre should do, which is to allow us to look at ourselves. Malcolm Chisholm referred to that. One of the National Theatre’s productions is “Calum’s Road”, the stage version of the true story of Calum MacLeod of Raasay, an island off Skye. He got so tired of waiting for the council to build a road that he built it himself—literally. He built one and three quarter miles of road: eat your heart out, transport minister. The National Theatre’s production of “Black Watch”—the telling of the history of that Scottish regiment—has been hugely popular and has toured the USA, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Ireland. The National Theatre of Scotland is about to open a production called “Enquirer”. I understand that it is about the media—or, perhaps, just the newspaper industry—in Scotland. I cannot think for a minute what it will be about. It is also establishing a presence across all Scotland and produces work for all ages. It is truly national, as are the other companies; as has been said, the RSNO was recently in Shetland for the first time in a long time. The National Theatre of Scotland is working on a huge community project in Shetland in collaboration with Shetland Arts. The SCO covers Scotland every year. It plays village halls as well as city halls and it sometimes even plays in sports halls. Scottish Ballet, too, takes smaller groups of dancers to such venues in addition to performing in Scotland’s main auditoria. All the companies perform to all ages. For example, reference has been made to Scottish Opera’s “BabyO” and “SensoryO” projects. I, too, remember having an extraordinarily good time at a show that was performed by a company called Scottish Opera Go Round which, if I remember correctly, was a small sub-company of Scottish Opera. It was hugely ambitious, although it had a very small cast with young singers and a single pianist. Through innovative stage design and so on it fitted into the most extraordinarily small venues. The audience was always amazed by the pianist, who would sometimes play through a two and a half hour or three hour opera. Collectively, the companies are huge employers of some of our most creative and talented people, be they actors, designers, technicians, singers, dancers or musicians. I hope that the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland satisfies the people whom the companies inspire to follow such careers by enabling them to develop their talents and skills. Our national performing companies are entertainers, educators, employers and ambassadors. We should be proud of them all, take a keen interest in them, let them be part of our lives and ensure that they continue to be at the core of cultural Scotland, both at home and abroad.

There is something Orwellian about the debate. The Conservatives are calling things black when they know that they are white, and all the Opposition parties seem to have picked up on the Liberal Democrats’ war cry of centralisation. They say that the SNP is centralising everything and taking power away from local authorities, taking it away from local communities and taking it all to itself. However, actions speak louder than words. I have been a councillor with Highland Council for the past nine years and, therefore, can make comparisons with the Scottish Labour-Liberal Executive—what a mouthful that is—and then the minority Scottish Government, which was in charge of devolving budgets to local authorities. Between 2003 and 2007, Highland Council had to deal with two big issues—moneys for many issues were ring-fenced, which made life difficult for it, but two issues were really extraordinary. One was the need for real capital investment in new schools, for which the council had its own plan. However, that plan was overruled by the only show in town—the Labour Party enforcing the private finance initiative/public-private partnership on local government. We now have extraordinary debt and PFI/PPP is well reported, well recorded and, in fact, increasingly recognised by people who thought that it was a good idea at the time to have been a complete and utter disaster for local authorities. It was an imposition that we will struggle to live with for a long time to come.

I am sorry, but Audit Scotland told us that the PFI programme was acceptable. We need to look at some of the advice that we take. The difference is that our model is not for profit.

No, I am sorry. It is not just a term.

No, I do not accept that.

I do not accept that “non-profit distributing model” is only a term. A graph of the repayments for a school that is built under the PFI programme and one that is built under what we recommend shows an enormous difference. Second only to that in its breathtaking control and centralisation was the Labour Party’s control of local authority housing and its brave new world of housing stock transfer. It cost Highland Council something in the region of £1.4 million—that is only an average figure—to build a case, with a gun at its back, to show that its tenants would like the housing stock to be transferred. In fact, we did not convince all our tenants. We have Mrs Thatcher to thank for the ballot that we had. When she had the crazy idea of selling off all our council houses, she wrote it into legislation that no tenant should have a new landlord imposed on them, which meant that the Labour Party could not simply move forward and transfer the housing stock; it had to ask the people. We must give the Tories credit for that. However, we should not give the Labour Party any credit for that kind of blackmail and for forcing local authorities to do something so that it could achieve its own ambition. Fortunately—in one respect—Highland Council tenants voted overwhelmingly to keep the council as their landlord, but that means that the council now suffers from a housing debt, because the sweetener was that the debt of £140 million would have been cleared if there was a housing stock transfer. In the event of people having their say and not going for housing stock transfer, they would be punished, to the extent that 50 per cent of income from their rent now does nothing more than service a housing debt. The Liberal Democrats promised to clear that housing debt. In fact, Danny Alexander himself, standing in the self-same region, declared in his leaflet that one of his top priorities would be to clear the housing debt, because he knows the poverty that it brings to our housing stock in Highland Council. That was an empty promise.

Absolutely. We campaigned strongly so that Scotland could keep—

No. Why would we transfer a really valuable asset to a private housing company for the price of £15 million? Of course we campaigned against that.

I am sorry that this has taken quite so long. The unfencing of moneys from central Government equated to £54 million for Highland Council. Together with the single outcome agreement, that made an enormous difference to Highland Council. Council members of all parties were delighted with the ability to spend the money in the areas where it was most needed.

14. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on a loss of music and art tuition as a result of specialist teachers losing their posts due to local authority budget reductions. (S4O-00932)

I note, in particular, the minister’s comments on the advantage of art and music education to young children. Does he agree that we could develop a strategy to involve organisations that the Government already supports in providing tuition and widening access to the services that they provide?

I am sure that the cabinet secretary is aware of the importance of mackerel to the Shetland fleet and the processing industry there. Will he update us on the efforts that are being made to secure a deal with Iceland and the Faroe Islands? Are trade sanctions being actively promoted?

When I offered to speak in today’s debate, I was aware that I would be doing so more from a sense of how important the bill is than from a position of taking an opportunity to show my detailed knowledge of the complexity of land registration and the related legislation. I am neither a lawyer nor a member of the committee, so I am really pushing my luck. The introduction to the SPICe briefing quotes the Scottish Law Commission as saying: “Much law is like plumbing: useful but unexciting and seldom thought about except when it goes wrong.” That relates to this very topic. On “Good Morning Scotland” this morning, only the debate that will follow this one was deemed worthy of attention. Clearly, our Cabinet Secretary for Health, Wellbeing and Cities Strategy has in the Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Bill a far more sexy subject than the Minister for Energy, Enterprise and Tourism has with land registration. I regret that. I believe that the bill should be of topical interest and that it would be justifiable to debate it on BBC radio. Land ownership should be promoted as something that everyone in Scotland will be affected by and may have direct active involvement with at some point in their lives. The ambition for accurate and accessible registration of land with a system that is transparent and efficient will give Registers of Scotland a reputation for being trustworthy and reliable and the people of Scotland reassurance and peace of mind. The history of land registration in Scotland is absolutely fascinating. We hope that it might be given some space in a new curriculum on Scottish studies. The present value of land, the lack of available land in communities for social purposes, the prospect of more community land ownership and the future of crofting and agriculture all mean that we should be interested in the bill. The impact of the land tenure system goes far beyond land use, because it influences the size and distribution of an area’s population; the labour skills and entrepreneurial experiences of the population; access to employment and thus migration; access to housing and land to build new houses; the social structure of an area; and the distribution of power and influence. Professor Bryan MacGregor said in the first McEwen memorial lecture: “In many areas of rural Scotland ... landowners play a crucial role in local development: they are the rural planners.” That was restated in Andy Wightman’s book “The Poor Had No Lawyers”, which has already been referred to. It has been calculated that in the past 30 years we have managed to register only 21 per cent of Scotland’s landmass. If we were to see no change in the rate of registration, I estimate that we would not have the essential knowledge that we seek on all Scotland’s land until 2132. I therefore welcome the bill, which I hope will radically change the method of registration. However, I think that we will do that only if we can make it a more sexy subject and something that everybody realises is important. Perhaps the voluntary registration aspect should be better highlighted. I hope that the minister might be able to do that. I hope that the bill becomes a hot topic for the minister as it makes its way and that we might yet hear him being interviewed about it by Gary Robertson on “Good Morning Scotland”.

I declare an interest, as someone who has been involved in tourism for 40 years. During that time, tourism has become an industry. There was a time when to call tourism an industry was tantamount to insulting shipbuilding, mining, manufacturing or the other big industries that were considered to be real industries. Working in the service industry often equated with failure—it was a workplace for the great unskilled. Why would anyone want those unsociable hours, the low pay, the disrespect and the lack of a career path? What about Scotland itself? The Scottish Tourist Board, as it was then, was restricted to promoting Scotland only in Scotland, and it suffered many of the ills of the industry that it hoped to serve. However, time changes everything, with the exception of perception, and that is what we must change. These are changed days and no mistake, but there is still work to do and some way to go. We cannot be complacent, as there is much that we can improve. [Interruption.] If members have not heard any of what I have said so far, they have missed the best bit. [Laughter.]

Employment is the single biggest issue that should exercise everyone’s mind, and in that regard the tourism industry offers significant opportunities. Let us stop talking about unskilled labour, because nothing could be further from the truth, as anyone who has been served badly at an airport, a restaurant, a bar or an information centre will testify. Dealing with the public and with visitors from the UK or across the globe can be challenging and demanding. If it is done well, it requires great skill. We should all agree that these are skilled jobs. We need help to get that message out, not only to potential employees, but to employers. Earlier this afternoon, Patrick Harvie mentioned his concern about any scheme that abuses young people’s labour. We must take that on board, as well as addressing the black market in labour, which needs to be rooted out. Through a year’s work experience in any aspect of tourism, with good management, people can develop their communication skills, their general knowledge, their physical ability, their sense of respect and other practical skills such as the ability to think and act responsively in any given situation. That is not unskilled labour. Such skills are transferable—they are required of a good employee in any job. Catering can often be a gateway for young people into other areas of work. Tourism is not something set apart, but is integral to every aspect of life in Scotland. How we regard ourselves is how we will be regarded by others. As an employer, I have long been aware of the status of the waiter, chef or visitor centre employee in other nations. Students from around the world who come to Scotland for a gap year and, more recently, economic migrants, often working in hospitality at some point, have high expectations. They work hard and accept that they do important work. That is a culture that we somehow have to instil in our industry. We have an opportunity to use tourism to best advantage. I suggest that we involve the unions, Skills Development Scotland, VisitScotland, the Scottish Tourism Alliance and agencies and business organisations in the challenge of not only taking on young people, but ensuring that their experience is positive, with skills that are transferable to any position and in any country. We have tended to pay lip service to the importance of the industry without recognising the importance of the workforce. Scotland is still growing its tourism industry, although perhaps not at the rate predicted in 2005. We should keep that target, however, because there have been seismic shifts since 2005 and there may be more. Take VisitScotland, for example—changed days there, too. It is now a smarter, more outward-looking organisation, with the core activity of marketing our country everywhere. It is working better than it has for a long time and earning deserved respect within the industry. Growth of 5 per cent a year could happen in the industry. The 20 per cent rate of VAT was a knock-back. We should accept that that is a disincentive that has restricted growth. For years, it has been our ambition to extend the season. This could be our chance. Scotland, if not open all night, is open all year. The fact that tourism is labour intensive should be welcomed. We fight against the hotel that becomes mechanically intensive and does not employ people. Tourism is a people industry. That is what we should be proud of and it is what we can support. It could be an even bigger and better employer. It can act as a springboard to other work, and build confidence, knowledge and life experience—all attributes of the skilled workforce that Scotland needs. I support the motion. We really need to make the part of it about skills investment work. We can offer young people a real opportunity. Let us do that.

I begin by coming straight back to Rhoda Grant and reminding her of the wording in her party’s manifesto as recently as 2007. There is no mention of RET. The manifesto states: “We will create a new scheme to give 40% reductions in the cost of ferry travel for foot passengers”— that is not RET— “with further discount arrangements”— they are not mentioned, not declared and not specified—

That does not amount to RET.

Thank you, Presiding Officer. Rhoda Grant said that we have not given the approach long enough, but Tavish Scott talked about a four-year trial. There is a great deal of confusion about what helps economic development. I am not here to defend the taking away of something. The SNP Government was right to introduce RET. I live near the mainland ferry terminal for the Stornoway to Ullapool ferry and I remember that for 30 years people would tell me, “We’d love to go to the Western Isles, but we’ve just looked at the tariffs and can’t possibly contemplate taking our car over.” I know for a fact that that happened every day, so over many years the tariffs must have prevented hundreds of thousands of people from travelling. The industry was seriously restricted because of the cost of ferry travel. I think that just about every member who has spoken has talked about how the statistics show the success of RET. It has been particularly successful in encouraging people to take their cars on the ferry; car travel has increased—not haulage. That tells us something about how we should approach the business. We face a 32 per cent cut in the budget—I hear everyone groan—and everyone has to take part of that cut. We simply cannot wait. This year we will have to contract for new ferries to be built, and the measures in the amendment in the minister’s name will have to be paid for. I do not like having to take something away; nobody does, and I am sure that the minister does not want to do it. However, we must consider the evidence that has been gathered. Let everyone be assured that we always consider economic development throughout Scotland. We know that that is the most important thing to do. Ferry fares are a significant issue in that regard and affect not just hauliers but everyone, but there is evidence that one part of RET has been hugely successful and the other less so, so it is not rocket science to work out where we might continue to offer support. When RET was introduced our opponents in the Parliament had plenty to say. There was talk of a cynical political bribe—

It was not cynical, and what we are doing is evidence of that. It was easy then to make such comments—it was just another day in the quagmire of Scottish politics, with one-upmanship at its worst. However, today we face a serious matter. The Government will continue to promote economic development in the Western Isles, despite the problems and the cuts that mean that we have had to take the decision that we have taken. I support the amendment in the minister’s name.

In his statement, the cabinet secretary mentioned Graham Donaldson’s report “Teaching Scotland’s Future” and in his responses to questions he has touched on that report and the McCormac review. How will those reports complement each other to make a positive contribution to the future of teaching in Scotland?

This has been an interesting debate. Before I begin reading out what I have written, I have to say that I am curious as to why the Labour and Tory members who have spoken so far have refused to recognise the differences between what is going on south of the border and what is happening in Scotland. Even as the gap gets bigger and bigger, and even as we prioritise in our budget the things that matter to people in Scotland and which have been disregarded by the Westminster Government, still they persist in declaring that we remain part of the United Kingdom. Can they still not see the difference? This is one of the most difficult tasks that the Parliament has to carry out. We need to acknowledge the differences between urban and rural residents across the country and we need to meet the needs of everyone in Scotland, be they pensioner or newborn, pupil or student, apprentice or entrepreneur, homeless, sick or unemployed. What message does the budget put out? How can our cabinet secretary satisfy so many growing demands with an ever-decreasing settlement from the UK Government? The Government’s fairer, smarter, healthier and wealthier aspirations can all be identified in practical terms in the budget spend and there is nothing that we have talked about or to which we aspire that is not clearly funded. We are maintaining council tax at the same level; indeed, it is probably the only household expense that has not increased and has given households more money to spend on other things. That is fairer. Meanwhile, the Tory-Liberal Democrat Government—

No—I do not have time. The Tory-Liberal Democrat Government increased VAT and added 5 per cent to almost everything. That is unfair. The move hits all development and the cost of council—in fact, all—services. It hits the poorest people hardest and has rendered some small businesses unprofitable and extremely vulnerable. The Labour Party is right to point out that small businesses are closing. It is no wonder; a 5 per cent increase in just about everything they buy—and the subsequent increase in what they have to charge—is about the hardest thing they face. That has happened not at the hand of the Scottish Government, but at the hand of the UK Tory-Liberal Democrat Government. Free further and higher education is fairer and smarter: I hope that the 80,000 students who took the time to e-mail us all will be delighted by the cabinet secretary’s announcement this afternoon. We are building the first council houses for more than a generation. The local authority house-building programme has to catch up on 30 years of neglect, so it will be inadequate. Whatever money we have to spend, we are not going to be able to catch up quickly, but I hope that a sustained Scottish National Party Government will catch up, because our ambition is to offer everyone who lives in Scotland a roof over his or her head. The house-building programme can only increase. It is fairer and healthier. The maintenance of free personal care for the older generation is fairer and healthier, and taxing the largest and most profitable businesses is fairer. Such measures are all relevant and welcome across the nation. Whether people are in the Western Isles or the northern isles, east, west, north or south, the need for housing and older folk being in need of care are nationwide. College reform is long overdue. As the Opposition parties are clearly lacking in ambition for our students, we need to know and we need the evidence. We do not have any money to waste and there is no place for disaffected young folk when we know that everyone has talent and an ability to develop. I welcome the preventative spend programme, the robust programme on healthier lifestyles, the programmes to reduce smoking and drinking, and investment in cycle paths. A fitter nation is a healthier nation. We need progressive and positive options on living better, wellbeing and understanding. People need to be taking control of their own health and feeling better for it. The ambition for our country must be statistics that show fewer operations being carried out and no waiting lists for heart operations, not because there are more surgeons and hospitals but because there are fewer operations and we have less need. We are no longer governed to be at the bottom of the pile in European statistics, but to raise our aspirations and be better. Our history is one of urban and rural poverty with children being already disadvantaged while they were still in the womb. The “Born to Fail” report on people born in the 1950s shows that things have changed little in more than 60 years. No wonder folk want something better. When the budget is being set and spending commitments are being made, it is time to reflect and take a look back at whether the investments that have been made have had the desired results. The scrutiny of the results will give us the necessary evidence. The SNP does not need the Opposition parties to pass the budget. The back benchers in this party are completely involved in the programme for development and we can more than do the job.

Edward de Bono articulated what I feel when he said: “There is no doubt that creativity is the most important human resource of all. Without creativity, there would be no progress, and we would be ... repeating the same patterns.” Recognition of, support for and investment in our creative people, whether they are visual artists, writers, architects, industrial designers or scientists, are prerequisites for a confident nation and for—as we say these days—going forward. Only a generation or two ago, Scotland might not have been quite so prepared to support this special year. Historically, our frustrating reluctance to endorse for fear of showing off was often to deny recognition of a special talent or creative skill in young people for fear of making them different or big-headed. Praise—far less celebration—was rarely the reaction of ordinary folk on discovering achievement or a special talent in family or community members. Glasgow was city of culture as recently as 1990, but although it absolutely deserved the title for many genuine and solidly good reasons, there were many who doubted that. Sadly, some were unaware of the rich seam of creativity in the city at the time. A new generation of writers and artists were having their work recognised in London and further afield, and yet they were not acknowledged at home and were not part of the city of culture. I suspect that that would never happen now, more than 20 years on. Alasdair Gray’s “Lanark” was hailed as the masterpiece that it is and was being printed in translation, while most people in Scotland had yet to know of its existence. I mention those examples not to make us feel bad, but to acknowledge the distance that we have come in 20 years. To go back further in time, the Clyde Unity Players in the 1930s and 1940s were performing plays in the recognised genre of kitchen sink drama. Those were plays written by ordinary working folk about the hardship of their lives: socialist realism. More than a generation later, John Osborne had his play “Look Back in Anger” staged in London, and theatre-goers were shocked at seeing an ironing board on the stage. That signalled the declaration and recognition of kitchen sink drama, but in Scotland a generation before we had been leading in so many of those different creative art forms, and yet never recognising enough ourselves. In the early 1970s, there was “The Cheviot, the Stag and the Black, Black Oil”, John McGrath’s play recounting the economic change that was brought about by the discovery of oil in the North Sea. Much further back, we had Sir David Lindsay’s “Ane Satyre of the Thrie Estaitis”, which was first performed during the midsummer holiday in Cupar in Fife, in 1552. That was probably the original musical, but Scotland is not often credited with that. It featured a cast of hundreds representing church, state and crown—the three estates—but in essence it is the story of the common weal. More recently, there was the National Theatre of Scotland’s production of “Black Watch”, which portrayed the history of the regiment and the realism of present-day life for its soldiers. Shakespeare referred in “Hamlet” to “the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is, to hold as ‘twere the mirror up to nature: to show virtue her feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure.” I mention that because creative Scotland has a fantastic cultural history that we can be so proud of. We can try to show how dependent we are on the work of not only our previous but our contemporary creative minds. Artists are not always—or even often—the friends of politicians. They are often critical—surly, even—and they can be difficult. However, in every part of Scotland, often against all the odds, there are writers, poets, painters and musicians who are endlessly reaffirming and defining our nation. Protest songs, folk songs, slow laments and whirling jigs; public art, photography, film and so on; and the widening of culture by people of different nationalities who make Scotland their home: all of that is Scotland’s rich, creative scene. Our artists often play a bigger part than we recognise. If we are asked to close our eyes and imagine Robert Burns, I would bet that it is the painting by Naismith that readily comes to mind. When we are asked to promote our country abroad, it is our artists who are in the front line. I believe that this year of heightened awareness, and of keen and ubiquitous promotion and dedicated involvement through the various strands of funding that are being made available, could prove to be a life-changing experience not only for our own people in Scotland, but for visitors, too. I worked in the tourism industry for many years and I know the difference that it makes to a holiday if people get the chance to hear some of our music or attend a performance of actors, strolling players or whomever, whether contemporary or traditional. That is so important, and only now are we beginning to recognise the true worth of that in our everyday life. I believe that this year should be the start of the new enlightenment—absolutely fresh thinking. We must be alert to new thinking, receptive to new music, informed about the creative minds in our midst and aware of the economic case—made regularly—regarding the importance of inventiveness and the encouragement that it needs to flourish. A number of years ago, I was involved with the Scottish Arts Council and visited what it considered to be an exemplar of a headmistress who had tried to encourage education through the arts. We went to Barlanark primary school and met some five-year-old children who had been looking at the architecture of Charles Rennie Mackintosh. I asked who Charles Rennie Mackintosh was, at which a five-year-old pulled himself up to his full height, with hands on hips, and was appalled that I had never heard of Mackintosh—I had, of course. He said, “And no only have we did Mackintosh—we’ve done Greek Tamson an a’.” I have never forgotten that.

That is the age that the year of creative Scotland should attack; if it does, we will have adults who are very fine indeed.

Farming and rural communities will welcome the programme of meetings that are being held across the country, and the invitation to submit recommendations. It is important that there be the widest-possible consultation on common agricultural policy reform. Our farmers and crofters desire to be heard and must be listened to. Without their experience, and without an understanding of the practical implications of legislation—including electronic identification and funding mechanisms such as pillars 1 and 2—we will have little hope of getting it right this time round. It is also important that we take cognisance of how rural development LEADER funding has contributed to economic activity through community companies, social enterprises and the growing third sector. There is evidence of entrepreneurship, which in many cases adds value to farmers’ raw products. As complex as the CAP is, the people whose livelihoods depend on it are central to the industry’s future. The industry can deliver not only strong communities in rural and often remote areas, but the sustained high-quality food production for which Scotland has a growing and strengthening reputation. To not get CAP reform right for Scotland is simply not an option. Agriculture policy in the coming decades will be shaped first and foremost by the following factors: the need to meet the rising demand for food and non-food crops in a globalised world, the need to create and preserve vital and attractive rural regions, and the need to conserve biodiversity and to adapt to the requirements of climate change. It is right that we acknowledge agriculture’s importance. In recent times there has been a change in people’s interest in living in rural areas in certain parts of the Highlands and Islands. Incentives that build on such interest and which attract younger folk to tenant farms or the croft entrant scheme are to be encouraged, and CAP reform must not act as a disincentive. We are at only the beginning of the road and we need to attract special people—creative thinkers who are multiskilled and committed to continuing a tradition while finding working patterns that are acceptable in the 21st century. If CAP reform is about anything, it should be about equity and fairness. Reform presents an opportunity to simplify overcomplicated processes and calculations, to ensure equality in the food chain between large and small farmers and crofters, and to end the historic model of support that created slipper farmers. It is not acceptable that inactivity should attract substantial grants when we cannot offer credible support to guarantee continued employment or to assist new entrants to the scheme. Education programmes to introduce young people to the land are hugely successful and awaken an interest not only in those who have previous connections to the land. Farming contributes massively to our tourism industry. I often describe tourism as the hugely important by-product of land management, agriculture, environmental programmes, conservation, traditions, development and contemporary life in Scotland. Highland cattle, red deer, belted Galloways, Aberdeen Angus cattle, sheep of every kind and other farmed animals have become the subject of postcards. Colin Baxter has even photographed them in the rain, which has become almost acceptable. I mention tourism because it has a strong role in our food industry. Scotland’s table of hospitality is the outcome of all that we will argue for in CAP reform. Tourism is set to break barriers this year, which must be important to the food and drink sector. As the marketing and exporting of our quality produce become ever more successful, it is essential that we support the primary producers, who are the key to our continued success. The CAP must recognise that importance and, in turn, reflect it in financial support. As we have heard, Scotland has not had a fair share of the agricultural budget and nor have we equitably shared the little that has come through the UK representations. It is with those failings in mind that we consider reform of the CAP. It is important for everyone in the industry to compare and contrast what our share might be if we made our case as an independent country. I make no apology to Mary Scanlon for mentioning constitutional reform. Alex Fergusson wondered how we might get a greater, and justified, share of the cake. I ask him and all the members who are in opposition to the Government to consider the likely income to our farmers and crofters were Scotland to become independent.

I, too, am a member of the Education and Culture Committee. I thank the convener for his succinct and comprehensive overview of the current situation as presented to the committee by those who have given evidence. The issue is the most important one and deserves all members’ ideas and input. We must share positive and negative experiences and we need a real desire to do our best for Scotland’s looked-after children. Members often speak about particular issues in their areas to do with, for example, harbours, city-centre congestion, wild land or urban renewal. Some of those issues resonate with other members whose areas have similar issues, but the issue of children who are looked after at home, in kinship or residential care or with foster parents is common to every constituency. I argue that it is not only the most important issue, but one that is pertinent to every member. Tomorrow, we will have a debate entitled “Scotland’s Future”, but today’s debate could also have been called that. For various reasons, the number of looked-after children is growing and the current economic situation might result in even larger numbers of children coming into that category. Other budgets and agencies address some of the causes, but it is vital that we consider the serious symptoms that lead to our failing our children. A high proportion of the children whom we fail become adults who fail. Members have cited the statistics that show the high percentage of those who are in young offenders institutions and prisons who were looked-after children. Everyone who is concerned about the issue has said that investment in the early years is crucial. The Government recognises that. It is important that the committee and Parliament are kept abreast of developments, so I was pleased to hear the minister talk about regular monitoring. It makes sense that the better nurtured, nourished, encouraged and loved a child is in the early years, the better able he or she will be to tackle confidently his or her life of discovery and learning thereafter. The issue is important for Scotland, too, because it is truly a reflection of our society. Nelson Mandela said: “There can be no keener revelation of a society’s soul than the way in which it treats its children.” The Parliament will always take time to celebrate our success. We regularly have motions that celebrate the achievement of children, schools or classes or of sports and arts groups, but we would do well to monitor our looked-after children with almost as much regularity. The convener highlighted the challenges. All those who are involved, including health workers, nurses, housing officers, children and parents, carers, teachers, social workers, the police and other professionals must work together to identify the support and help that are needed. That sounds awesome. We heard in evidence just how difficult it is for the professionals to come together. We can imagine that it is not an easy task, but it is nonetheless the most important task that we face. What is the challenge for those professionals and what are the frustrations and the barriers to success? Who measures what success looks like? It is important that we listen to our professional advisers on that. A fundamental issue must be the exceptionally high number of absences and exclusions from school among looked-after children compared with the figure for other children. We cannot ignore that in considering the educational attainment of looked-after children. Figures from the Scottish Parliament information centre show that the overall exclusion rate of looked-after children in 2009-10 was 365 per 1,000, whereas for all schoolchildren it was 45 per 1,000. That must be unacceptable and it relates directly to the lack of achievement. If someone is not in school, the chances are that they will not learn as well or that their education will suffer. There is anxiety that the figures are even worse than that—I understand that some cases are not included in the figures. It is important for the committee to note that preliminary absences are not taken into account when the final figures are counted up. That is shocking and means that the situation is even worse. I guess that the main point that I want to make is that not all education happens in school. Peer groups and the family, however they manifest themselves, are as much of an educational influence as teachers are, and they too need to understand their role in an educational context. Across Scotland, we have some spectacularly good extra-curricular activities that have given children a particular and special opportunity to achieve new skills. Research has shown and books have been written about how practical and creative skills result in greater concentration, a greater sense of satisfaction and greater confidence in academic study. Those options are not always available to the looked-after child, perhaps because the parent or guardian does not have an interest in or an instinct with regard to the child’s ability.

One of the things that we might do is look carefully at the good examples to which children may more easily relate and seriously have advantage. Presiding Officer, I welcome the debate. Thank you for the extra time.

Is the First Minister aware that the Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets has published its proposals to change the system of charging for electricity transmission? The proposed regime benefits the Highlands but not the islands. Will the First Minister raise the issue with Ofgem and encourage it to model the impact of the proposals on Scotland’s islands?

15. To ask the Scottish Government what action it will take to improve employment opportunities in small and micro businesses in the Highlands and Islands. (S4O-00503)

Does the minister agree that by far the majority of businesses in the Highlands and Islands are small and micro and that there is a particularly high rate of membership of business organisations such as the Federation of Small Businesses and the Scottish Council for Development and Industry? Will Skills Development Scotland use those organisations to promote employment initiatives? Traditionally, take-up of such initiatives has been fairly low, so it would be good if better information was delivered through business organisations.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s speech and I welcome the debate, which is as necessary as it is timely. Implementing the planning and infrastructure programme over the long term will give everyone concerned time to reflect, to contribute to the discussions on opportunities and to consider the positive consequences. The political landscape is often viewed in the short term, with hasty decisions being made within a four-year term. Rarely, if ever, is a 20 to 30-year plan introduced. Alex Johnstone said that the A9 had been made a priority ahead of roads linking Scotland and England. Well, folk in the north like to go to England as well; it is not one-way traffic. I would like to reflect on a time when infrastructure investment re-energised people and reinvigorated the economy in the Highlands. That was when the Highlands and Islands was granted objective 1 status. European funding lifted the region from the bottom of the league table for low income, low standards of living, little development and a diminishing population. The programme of development was agreed with the district councils, the regional council, the Highlands and Islands Development Board and other relevant agencies. Unfortunately, Westminster set the appropriate areas for funding and, predictably, some of our priorities were changed as a result. The reasons for that were eventually revealed. They involved the disaster that was the private finance initiative—the Skye bridge will remain as an example of that in the memory of most highlanders for a very long time. It also cost the Scottish Parliament dear. The objective 1 investment had a dramatic effect on the Highlands and Islands—in other words, it worked. The blue symbol with gold stars quickly became ubiquitous in the region. Over 10 years, single-track roads with grass growing down the middle became two-carriageway, tarmacadam roads, with bridges where necessary. Those roads created ease of access for school buses, hauliers, locals and tourists, 24 hours a day. Harbours were improved, some telecommunications were introduced, and many community developments became a reality. The area was opened up but, more than that, many parts and most sectors began to thrive. Objective 1 status offered connectivity, accessibility and inclusion. The growth in economic activity was reflected in better jobs and better pay. The aims of objective 1 were being met, and confidence started to grow. All that happened over a very long period of time. I mention that because the Highlands and Islands councils and development agencies had and have better communications—and the case for investment was easier to make—with Brussels than with the Westminster Government, which was much harder to persuade of the needs of that part of Scotland. In spite of the current economic situation, the Scottish Government’s infrastructure plan, together with the regeneration strategy that was announced last week, can and will stimulate our communities to aspire to better things. I urge the Government to recognise, as part of the plan, the achievements that can be delivered at the hand of local community groups, be they charitable trusts or development trusts. I can recite a litany of remarkable achievements by such groups. They have acquired or created businesses, run ferries and crossings and rebuilt harbours; built community centres, swimming pools, nurseries and market gardens; and recycled furniture, made designer knitwear and designed golf courses. Such groups exist from Shetland to Lochaber and they need to be part of the overall infrastructure plan. Last night, I had sight of a plan that several common grazings committees in the Western Isles have united around. The Point and Sandwick Development Trust in Lewis has been at work since 2005 and will soon make a £15 million investment in a renewables development that will be wholly owned by the community. The more common development of this kind is the alliance of a landowner and a corporate wind farm developer who will agree with the community the amount of community benefit, which is usually estimated to be £1.1 million over 25 years. However, by doing the development itself, the community in this case has attracted £15 million and expects to achieve £36 million over the period, which is quite a difference from the usual. I hope that empowering such communities, whether urban or rural and in whichever part of Scotland they are, will be part of the plan. Taking the best examples of community ownership and sharing that capacity will contribute to the confidence that empowerment brings—nothing succeeds like success. The future can be bright and what we have heard in the debate is about confidence and belief. I am sorry about the cannot-dos on the other benches. It would be good to hear some support for an ambitious programme of investment that is possible—everything is possible. Communities in Lewis show that it is possible and communities in the remotest parts of the most rural areas of Scotland are proving the impossible to be possible. We should get behind the infrastructure plan. Making Scotland better, recognising all its parts and making the investment that is needed for them to achieve their potential form the necessary blueprint for any infrastructure investment plan. I support the motion.

I would like to go back to the point that Richard Simpson made about the design of some of the pylons. Given the Scottish Government’s commitment to improved design in house building and so on, and given what has been done with former industrial sites, it is clear that there are things that can be done to improve appearances that do not necessarily incur a great deal of expense. Is there any possibility of involving some of the industrial product design departments of universities and colleges in Scotland? Although many people in the Highlands are supportive of wind turbines and see them as being quite beautiful works of art—

The pylons are not like that, and I think that many people who are supportive of renewable energy are concerned about the landscape.

4. To ask the Scottish Government how it is encouraging the development of allotments. (S4O-00422)

I agree that there is growing evidence of the many benefits that result from having allotments, which include making Scotland healthier, reducing food miles, improving biodiversity, aiding physical and mental health, carbon capture and the clear reward and satisfaction that people get from growing their own food. In recognition of those benefits, does the Government consider that allotments could become an integral part of planning applications for modern housing developments in both rural and urban areas?

Scotland is a maritime and seafaring nation. Our smallest and biggest industries have been, and are, on the sea and are situated around the entire coast of Scotland. Shipbuilding, trading by sea, transportation, Ministry of Defence activities, fishing, fish farming, ferry transport, recreational sailing and renewable energy developments are all on the sea. All that activity, which is vital to the economy, cannot and must not be put at risk as a result of Westminster Government cost cutting. It is not even a cost-cutting exercise—that would imply interest and concern, resulting in proper investigation and risk assessment before a decision could be made about savings. Other members will speak about the outrage of the closure of coastguard stations in the south of Scotland that work from the Clyde and the Forth. I will highlight a few facts about the ETVs—emergency towing vessels, hitherto known as tugs. I compare the Minch to the M8 with extra-heavy loads travelling regularly—as they do, sometimes with police escort. Like the Pentland Firth and other sea lanes, the Minch is known to be difficult water to navigate. It is important to understand the work that the tugs do. Between 2006 and 2010, the two tugs that cover the Northern Isles and the Minch carried out 562 taskings—that is, escorting commercial vessels through the Minch—answered 42 distress calls and were involved in seven commercial tows. What about the ones that do not make it—the accidents in the Minch? In 2003, the Jambo, a Cyprus-registered vessel, sank after hitting rocks off the Summer Isles near Achiltibuie, spilling a cargo of zinc concentrate—3,300 tonnes of the chemical. Several sources that I looked at while doing some research for facts about the incident state that the zinc concentrate was removed from the sea bed, but it was not. It is still there, as is the wreck of the Jambo. The crew was rescued by the Lochinver lifeboat, and all the emergency services were alerted. The Maritime and Coastguard Agency, the agent of the Secretary of State for Transport, set up an incident room in Ullapool. Up to 15 people—including marine biologists, engineers, scientists, environmentalists, lawyers, accountants, insurance agents, coastguards and a myriad of others—were in that room at any given time. Officials from London and Bristol came, but they used local knowledge—which has been emphasised in every speech—in every aspect of their work. Several telephone lines, banks of computers, televisions and filming equipment were installed. After three and a half months, they left. The cost of that operation is another bit of research that must be done, but I guess that it must be a matter of public record. Whatever it is, it far outweighs the cost of preventative measures. I am not saying that the agencies could have prevented the wreck of the Jambo, but such an incident may happen again unless we pay attention to the traffic in the Minch. When the Jambo incident happened, Councillor Foxley and the late Councillor Fulton of Highland Council made strong representations to the Scottish Executive to improve and increase the cover on the Minch and were hugely supported by the Liberal-Labour Government. However, times have changed. The sea around Skye and the island of Raasay is used as a training ground for the Royal Navy. The submarine HMS Trafalgar sustained millions of pounds of damage when it ran aground off Skye in 2002. More recently, the submarine HMS Astute ran aground in October last year. The ETVs—the tugs—came to their rescue. We really cannot leave our busy shipping sea lanes unattended. The value of the fishing industry, the MOD sites at Loch Ewe and Kyle of Lochalsh, the passage of nuclear submarines through the Minch to the bombing range at Durness and the commercial traffic all indicate the need for a comprehensive safety policy. With regard to the previous contract for the tug service, which came to an end at the end of September, Mike Penning has stated in a letter that it is simply not appropriate for the taxpayer to fund this provision. However, that is another debate. In any case, the Government has clearly recognised that we cannot do without the tugs—after all, it subsequently re-established the contract, albeit for three months. Now that we are six weeks away from the end of the current contract, what work has happened in the meantime? I can tell the chamber that the people running the tug service have not been consulted. What investigation is taking place? Indeed, what of the modernisation that Alex Fergusson talked about? I do not think that anyone has any issue with that—all services need to be reviewed—but the present Westminster Government seems to be picking off each of the services and looking at them in isolation when in fact we must look collectively at all the services: the coastguard, the tugs, the lifeboats and fisheries protection vessels. They all have to kick in, as indeed do the Royal Air Force and the air rescue service. It is easy to look at parts of the whole and decide to strip something off. However, we cannot do that in this case. Now that the Westminster parliamentary recess is coming up, when will this work be carried out? Why was the service recontracted for three months if it is not needed? If it is needed, what evidence is the Government gathering to make its case?

As for the reprieve for the coastguard centres in Shetland and the Western Isles and the claim that terms and conditions are secure, I point out that that only holds if the jobs continue to exist. Those centres have received no assurance that they will not face any staff reorganisation. Of course I want control of the service around Scotland’s coasts to lie where it should lie—with the Scottish Parliament, whose members know and understand the waters and realise that on this issue local knowledge means something, and not with Westminster and the current threat that it is making to the service.

Given the member’s emphasis on local knowledge, and in light of his amendment that “recognises the importance of retaining the Emergency Towing Vessels”, what local knowledge did Mike Penning or the Conservative-Liberal Government listen to before they made decisions?

Will the member give way?

10. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the role of common grazings with regard to the future of crofting. (S4O-00398)

With reference to the review of the common agricultural policy and the draft proposals for non-historic direct payments post-2013, unintended consequences of the change could be abandonment and further economic decline. Will the minister agree to work with stakeholders to find a mechanism to ensure that common grazings receive equitable payments per hectare of land managed?

I thank the cabinet secretary for bringing the debate to the chamber. It is one of the reasons why I think that the Scottish Parliament can do so much. For generations, this kind of debate was never heard. Such debates were never heard in Westminster and they are never likely to be heard there. The fact that we are debating this subject, and in public, means that we start to raise our game. Architecture has often been seen as the unrecognised art form that lags behind. Mike MacKenzie talks about it being the one art form that we live with all the time, but we have never recognised it as such. It is a bit like design generally: we do not criticise it until it is really bad. If a person has to sit for three or four hours on a badly designed chair, they will think that somebody designed it badly, but they will not think about the design when they are really comfortable and somebody has designed the chair well. As long as something is reasonably pleasing to the eye and seems to work, we are uncritical. I was thinking about Scottish studies as Fiona Hyslop was making her opening speech. I hope that all the arts in Scotland, including architecture, will be recognised in an educational context. The Scottish Arts Council never recognised architecture. That was not in its portfolio, but Creative Scotland recognises it. Those are good moves that the Government has made. It put down the marker, and I am sure that architects must be delighted with what has happened. I return to the topic of the debate. I agreed with much of what Patricia Ferguson said, and have written down that the generation before us cleared slum housing that was built in the 19th century, and we continue to clear slum housing that was built much more recently. There is a huge learning curve in that respect. Some of that housing was built only a couple of generations ago. We cleared people from places where several families on one landing shared one toilet without any running water. We all know about that, and earlier generations of some members’ families lived in such conditions. However, it is interesting and relevant to the debate that getting an inside lavvy and a bit more living space were not prerequisites for wellbeing, neighbourliness or a sense of place. I remember people leaving the Gorbals and going to live in Easterhouse, where they would have a dry, lit space with their own front door and where they would not share a bathroom with a bath and a lavatory. Although people were excited about that at the time, it did not work. Those are the lessons that we must learn. We did not learn them quickly enough. Patricia Ferguson said that we discovered that we had made mistakes with high-rise living and corrected them, but we did not. In the 1950s, it was known to be a disaster, but we went on to build Easterhouse with 40,000 people—the same population as Perth.

I stand by what I said. The method that we used to build post-war flats was known to have failed elsewhere. We sent 40,000 people to live in tower blocks with no other services. It did not work. We learned the lesson later on and started to correct it. Those examples show us that we must think about what we are doing now. The importance of place making to Scotland’s economy is that we move into a better place if we recognise the worth of design. Good and bad design may be in the eye of the beholder, but we must recognise design. We must recognise the fact that there are traditions of building in, for example, the Highland vernacular or the Edinburgh vernacular and we must respect them, but that should never stop new design. We must tackle climate change. We have good examples on that. The cabinet secretary mentioned the expo that we held. That was all about finding a different way of living. Some of the designs at that expo were reputed to have an annual heating bill of between £100 and £150. We cannot afford to ignore that or to ignore new building. The Government has a duty to try to bring together the developer, the architect and—perhaps more importantly—the master planner. We can do that for no more money. Good design need not be expensive. We must find a way of delivering energy-efficient homes to tackle climate change and fuel poverty. At the same time, we must give people good, well-designed houses where the community becomes more important and services are local. It is not at all unlikely that we can achieve that. We have really good examples throughout Scotland—a number have been mentioned already—but we often do not know about them. The future must be sharing that information and bringing together the experts that we already have in Scotland to recognise the importance of architecture and place making to our economy.

I simply have a few questions about Liam McArthur’s motion. At the start of his speech, Liam McArthur said that he would show how dramatically awful the situation is with the removal of the ADS for businesses, but he singularly refused to do that. He has not given evidence on that. I am interested in the alternatives that we might consider. My reading of the European Commission paper is that, when the air discount scheme was introduced in 2006, it was heavily biased towards individuals. The paper says: “The aid must have a social character, that is, it must, in principle, only cover certain categories of passengers travelling on a route such as children, handicapped people, people with low incomes, etc. However, in the case where the route concerned links an underprivileged region, the aid could cover the entire population of this region.” So it does. Individuals are free to take advantage of the scheme. The SNP Government has introduced other business aids through rates and the promotion of food and drink, for example. Shetland, Orkney and the Western Isles have taken advantage of those opportunities and the determination to link people by broadband. I am not defending what has happened, because it is always difficult to take away a service that has been offered. I am sure that the minister has a view on that, but I am sorry that Liam McArthur has not addressed some of the positives of the air discount scheme as it stands. In this day and age, encouraging business travel is pretty outdated. In Shetland, we have one of the finest departments in a college promoting videoconferencing. Surely it would behove Liam McArthur to propose a members’ business debate on how we shake up the Parliament and, indeed, central belt Scotland and make them recognise that that is the direction in which we have to go. Communication is about a lot more than taking a flight, which does not fit with any carbon-reduction agenda. There is a big debate to be had but, sadly, this debate is not it and has not contributed to it.

Will the member take an intervention?

5. To ask the Scottish Government what its position is on the importance and value of the organisation, Room 13, which is based at Caol primary school in Lochaber. (S4O-00312)

I am glad that the cabinet secretary approves of the work done by Room 13 and values it. How does he suggest that we could spread the word about that work to other schools in Scotland? I would like to request that some of the directors of and other people involved with Room 13 could meet the minister to discuss how to take it forward. Will he agree to that?

As other member have done, I welcome the debate and the minister’s clear commitment to changing for the better the lives of some of our children. I also acknowledge the considered and concerned speeches that have been made, which evidence Parliament’s desire to improve the system in order to allow that to happen. I do not believe that we will concern ourselves with a more important issue; there simply cannot be anything that is more important. We are committed to a healthier, fairer and smarter Scotland, but those principles and ambitions cannot be realised if they are not applied to the most vulnerable people in our society. There is no one more vulnerable than a child in his or her early years who is without a stable, secure and safe environment and a loving family. A child being taken from its parents is one of the most distressing images that we can see. Comments are often made about the resilience of our children—their extraordinary ability to survive against all the odds and to accept the unacceptable as the norm. However, descriptions of ugly, dangerous and chaotic lifestyles—family lives that are characterised by neglect, extremely cruel conditions, parental drug and/or alcohol abuse, violence, parental mental illness, physical abuse and parents being unable to put the child’s needs before their own and to keep the child safe—challenge that thinking. I pay tribute to those whose work it is to judge whether it is in a child’s best interests to take them from their parents, because it cannot be done quickly or easily. However, when the most vulnerable are in a different and safer place, speed is of the essence, whatever decisions are to be taken and whatever process is to be gone through. All the services that are involved must show efficient, effective and collaborative joint concern, and they must come to the right decision without delay. There is too much evidence and too many reports that show why Angela Constance is raising the matter now: looked-after children are hugely disadvantaged. There are case histories of children being temporarily looked after for years and often by more than one—sometimes six—different families before finally finding a permanent home. If it is to be thorough, the process will take time. It should not be rushed, if that might result in the wrong decision being made. There are many well-constructed reports that give evidence of legitimate reasons for delay in coming to a decision about a child’s future. I am a member of the Education and Culture Committee. Angela Constance might like to have the Official Report of yesterday’s meeting, because it is relevant to the debate.

I agree with that. That is the point that I had hoped to convey, so I am sorry if it did not come across. Yesterday, the Education and Culture Committee heard from Claire Burns, who is the strategic policy implementation manager at the centre for excellence for looked-after children in Scotland—a snappy title. The comprehensive involvement of all the professionals and agencies in finding a way forward became clear from her presentation. A myriad of reading matter has offered a myriad of ways forward. There seems to be no shortage of academic debate about assessing the problems, although there is an inability to find practical solutions to them. The nub of the issue that we have to address is that it seems that although there is agreement on a clear way forward, we are not implementing it. The motion is exacting in recognising the need to move forward, the need to accept that the solution has already been identified and the need to put it into practice. Therefore, challenging the current process is key to making a difference in the lives of hundreds of children. Article 8 of the European convention on human rights says that everybody has a right to a family life. If we are to realise that for Scotland’s most vulnerable children, we must take the action that is required, offer help when it is needed and challenge the thinking that inhibits progress. The motion rightly highlights the importance of permanence and stability in the care of our looked-after children, but it is also right to acknowledge the services—professional and voluntary—that exist to help the parents of those children. No one can imagine their mental state, helplessness and vulnerability. If we are taking responsibility, we must not falter or fail their children, either. In her last words at yesterday’s Education and Culture Committee meeting, Claire Burns said that if the looked-after children were our children, we would pay attention, we would be up at the school and we would want to take up opportunities for them. That is true. We have heard from people who are both councillors and MSPs, and we have had a great deal of education on our responsibilities as corporate parents. How can we be corporate parents to 500 children whom we do not know? If we understand better the position of those children and can feel emotion for them—as if they are our own children—we will look on the problem very differently. Everyone has the right to a family life. I will finish with a positive example. A young couple in my council ward who knew that they could not have children had established that they were keen to adopt. They were asked whether they would adopt a family and they said that they did not mind—that they would adopt one or two children. Between one night and the next they became parents to four children—an entire family—who had lost their parents. They were overjoyed. The message for Scotland is that we have to show adoption in a positive light. These are Scotland’s children and we care desperately that we get this right.

Like many others in the chamber, I welcome the debate. There has been a learning curve for a number of members. There has certainly been support for, as well as some focused concern from, different agencies that are charged with maintaining—if that is the right word—or managing our heritage. The debate highlights the asset that Scotland’s heritage undoubtedly is, but we must acknowledge the not inconsiderable barriers that will, if they remain unaddressed, restrict the access that the Scottish Government recognises should be comprehensive. Last week, we debated the introduction of Scottish studies into the curricula of both primary and secondary school education. The programme should and must give all our pupils access to our history, geography and culture. It would be passing strange if the work of Historic Scotland, the national library and museum, the Scottish Council on Archives, Scottish Natural Heritage, the Built Environment Forum Scotland and others was not central to their learning. When Patricia Ferguson made a plea for every organisation to be acknowledged, I had sympathy for the cabinet secretary because there are so many—each of us could mention many just in our own constituencies. They perhaps do not make the same investment in digital evidence as the example that we saw last night, but they provide the book of first entry, if you like, in recording social history at home. The place of heritage in education is therefore not questioned, and indeed is not new. All the organisations have declared their commitment to their educational programmes in their manifestos and business plans. My hope for the Scottish studies programme is that all those organisations and agencies become household names in Scotland and that we do not have to see a list of them because they are—as I think they should be—completely integral to life in this country. No one should be in any doubt about their existence, their purpose or their ambitions. Patricia Ferguson raised a point that focused on the challenge to the Government. She gave the example of the Titian that was toured around Scotland. As somebody who lives in what is considered to be remote and rural Scotland, I know that there is nothing better than getting to come to Glasgow and Edinburgh. For a lot of people—schoolchildren and youngsters, among others—it is no longer unrealistic to find time to visit the central belt and Scotland’s museums. There is a limit to what can be toured around. Such tours should be part of a programme—outreach work is important—but we should not forget that people want to come to the palaces of art and the museums to see the artefacts, too. I congratulate Clare Adamson on hosting the event in the Parliament last night at which a number of members were introduced to the wonders of the digital age. Being taken on a digital tour of a royal palace such as Stirling castle and the archipelago of St Kilda, which has been mentioned, and then, at the press of a button, zooming in on Mount Rushmore in South Dakota, was amazing—and that is just the start. The Scottish ten project is one of a number of fantastic projects and, if we do our job properly, no one in Scotland will be unaware of it. In addition, at the event we had ScotlandsPeople and ScotlandsPlaces making tracing ancestry accessible—and making it look easy, if only at the time. I think that we all found, among others, our great-grandfathers or great-great-grandfathers last night. Genealogy is a fairly recent tourist attraction and it is attracting ever-growing numbers. The tourism industry is always looking for new attractions, and this one is sure to run and run. The Scottish diaspora are still looking homeward, and they seem more determined than ever to search for family roots, which brings them back to find the tenements or crofts of their forefathers and foremothers. In Highland, we opened a multimillion pound archive centre in 2008. It is based in Inverness but has links and outreach to Caithness, Lochaber and Skye—all areas of clearance and depopulation at various times. It is well placed to attract our people back and help them to trace their roots. So, both education and tourism could benefit enormously from the digital developments in our heritage industries, if I can give them such an unappealing generic title. However, there are barriers, about which concerns have been expressed elsewhere by the agencies. The biggest barrier in remote and rural Scotland is the lack of broadband, which has been mentioned by David Stewart and Jamie McGrigor. That is a potential barrier to a great deal and must be a consideration. I am not an expert on information technology—quite the opposite, in fact—but I know that, increasingly, education, tourism, business development and growth, cultural expansion, innovation and creativity are all moving onwards in digital time. I am nearly there. This is where our ambitions for the digital future of Scotland’s heritage may take some time to be realised. Although we have made the investment and have received the investment from Westminster, as has been mentioned, the Barnett formula rules seem not to apply on this occasion.

I will finish on an optimistic note. I applaud the work of all the agencies whose work is concerned with our living history. That work is sustaining our natural environment and helping us to understand who we are, where we came from and where we are going.

Will the member take an intervention?

The introduction of Scottish studies into the curriculum for primary and secondary schools is long overdue. That is not to say that much does not already happen—and happen well—in some schools but too much happens by default, not by design. The subject is too important to be left to chance. Giving children the opportunity to discover all aspects of the country in which they live gives them a sense of place and knowledge that will serve them well in whatever their walk of life, whatever their career path and wherever they live thereafter. The members of the working group need to look at the excellent teaching practice that already exists and which has already been highlighted to ensure that current best practice can become common practice. In the mid 1980s I visited schools in the Soviet Union—or what are now Russia and the Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia. In a primary school in Vilnius, 60 nine and 10-year-olds sang “O my Luve’s like a red, red rose” word perfect in Scots. Then they sang it in Lithuanian and Russian. It made me wonder how many Scottish schoolchildren could actually sing it in Scots. Just in case members think that there was a lot of preparation for my visit, I should point out that we were in a communist state and the school did not know that we were coming. Although our history and many aspects of our culture are of interest to other countries, we seem reluctant to share them with our own children. Of course, Scotland’s history is not something that we can always be proud of. Our role in the British empire, in slavery and in land acquisition in other countries are all part of it and need to be learned. We need to learn about our mistakes and although our past can be inglorious, that is no reason not to teach history; indeed, it is a reason why it should be taught well, properly and exactly. Scottish studies surely represents the best opportunity to share the many cultures in our country and to do more than acknowledge them. It occurs to me that most motions that are lodged by members are to do with celebrating excellence—often in history, or in the commemorative work of some group or other in their community. We share and pass on such things in the Parliament, but we do not generalise across the nation to recognise their worth. Scotland has produced and continues to produce creators, innovators, original thinkers and high achievers in philosophy, literature, science, medicine, geology, mathematics, product invention and design, textiles, art, agriculture, poetry, architecture, fashion, sport and many more areas. That knowledge could encourage and inspire our young folk. Indeed, more than that, I believe that it is our duty to deliver information about that and that it is their right to have that. The Parliament supports a great many organisations and agencies that are trusted with much of the nation’s wealth, all of which have—or should have—educational programmes. I am thinking of the national companies, the National Library of Scotland, the orchestras, the Scottish Youth Theatre and others. An impressive brochure from the Scottish Council on Archives, which is one of those organisations, landed in our mailboxes only this week. Sally Magnusson says in that brochure’s foreword: “Our archives are our national memory. They show us the forging of the Scottish nation over the centuries and open a window on its contacts with other peoples and cultures.” Members do not know everything there is to know about Scottish history or about one another’s constituencies and regions. How many people have met the Gaelic-speaking Pakistani community in the Western Isles? How many people know that Chinese schoolchildren are teaching other children Mandarin in primary schools in the north-west Highlands? There are extraordinary, extreme and wonderful parts of our education system and extraordinary, extreme and wonderful cultures that our children are aware of and are being taught about, but we need to share that. If we do not know that, how on earth are we to govern? There are children who will, in 20, 30 or 40 years’ time, take our seats in the Parliament. If we have a national curriculum in which national Scottish studies is taught, I suspect that they will be better informed than those of us who are in the chamber today, who have heard of Up-Helly-Aa in Shetland and may have heard of the magnificent book festival in the south-west of Scotland. They will know and understand; better still, they will have studied some of the authors whose names are yet to be discovered. It is interesting that members have mentioned authors in their keenness to explain that Scottish studies are taught sufficiently and to show how well they did by the education system, as they can identify MacDiarmid, Lewis Grassic Gibbon and others. However, there are contemporary authors. Scotland’s publishers publish nearly 1,000 Scottish literature books a year. We need to have that information in our schools, and people need to know about it. We may not read all of those books and we may not need to know all that, but we need to know what the country is capable of doing and is doing. Children and young people have the right to know about all those agencies and to take advantage of them, but everything cannot be left to the teachers and other experts in their respective fields. The new study should deliver a message for us all to better understand the different aspects of Scottish life. All of us have much to learn; ignorance is not bliss.

The cabinet secretary has ably articulated the fishing industry’s importance to Scotland and the serious implications for its future if the CFP review body ignores regional differences and needs. In the region that I represent, the Highlands and Islands, all kinds of fishing combine to make it our largest industry; indeed, it is as important as oil to the Scottish economy and not only generates work for fishermen but sustains land-based employment at harbours and ports and in the transport, processing, trade and retail sectors. It is ironic that the CFP, which I am sure was initially designed as an expression of common cause by European states, should threaten all of that. In the 1970s, the UK Government banned herring fishing, which led to boats being tied up in the Highlands and Islands, particularly along the west coast. Markets were then found in north Africa, Russia and Japan for mackerel, which had hitherto not been fished. It resulted in an extraordinary Klondike. Boats from every part of the UK came to share the bonanza. They had to steam only very short distances to fill their holds with fish; indeed, many did so twice a day. That Klondike continued for just over a decade and, by the late 1980s, it was all over. It was simply unsustainable. Such practices would be unthinkable today. That bit of history is relevant in illustrating why the belief exists in the need for a serious approach to conserving fish stocks and better management of the catch and the industry. Given this common cause, it would not have been unreasonable to have had a considerable and responsible common fisheries policy that was agreed by European partners. If the policies are to be right for our industry, it is essential that their terms and conditions are practical and understood, and political representation and negotiation in Europe must be undertaken by those who understand the industry. As others have mentioned, certain conditions in the CFP review that have been flagged up by our MEPs would be wholly detrimental to the industry in Scotland. The subject of discards is interesting. To many, the case will appear black and white: fishermen should just land everything. However, the situation is complex and we must listen to and understand practitioners and their agencies on this matter. The industry—which is, I would say, not whiter than white—has recognised and is acting on conservation and discards issues in order to maintain sustainability. However, Europe’s proposed changes will negate all that work. Too often, European legislation is simply unfit for purpose; meanwhile, other countries that claim that parts of the legislation do not suit their situation or culture are granted derogations. That is why we need to establish a united front and lobby the UK Government, demanding that Scotland sends her own representative to argue our case. Scotland’s fishermen have seen dramatic changes in the industry since the 1970s. They have led on conservation, have worked to reduce discards and want to ensure that the industry is heritable, but the threat of ill-informed legislation from Europe, the dramatically increased quotas for Iceland and the Faroes that have already been mentioned and climate change, which is affecting sea temperature and species, are of enormous concern and represent a disincentive to young people who might be attracted into the industry. On derogation, I can cite as an example the ferries review that happened when Scotland was badly represented by, as I remember, a land-bound MP with no experience of ferries. That cost Scotland dear in comparison with other countries. For example, Greece—another nation of islands—sought and was granted a derogation. It was able to continue to run and subsidise a ferry service fit for purpose for the country, whereas we did not seek derogation, ignoring the numerous ferries that we have in Scotland, and paid the price by having to undertake a costly exercise in putting our ferry services out to tender.

That is simply not true. I do not want to enter into a debate about ferries; I simply used the example to show that derogation is possible in any European policy that is put forward. The other argument is for another day, and I will happily take it on at that time. I believe that, if we get fisheries policy right, we can see the industry stabilise, develop and continue for future generations. Fish is part of a healthy diet, 30 per cent of our exports, part of our culture and part of our economic future, and part of our work in this place is to secure and sustain the industry. That is less than likely if we cannot directly negotiate the terms of the CFP. I plead to the other parties in the Parliament that we unite in asking that we have Scottish representation, in stating that our cabinet secretary is the best person to make the case, and in supporting the case.

Scotland’s record on young people training and studying abroad does not compare favourably with that of other nations in Europe. Does the cabinet secretary share my view that that is a problem? If so, what action will he take to address the issue in the coming years?

I support the First Minister in everything that he said today. It seems that the Government’s line in the document that it has published is all about the people of Scotland, and everything that affects them, including housing. We have heard some fine rhetoric from Opposition members about house building. The restriction on house building is partly to do with the housing debt, which is the result of a bribe that did not work by a Labour Government that asked councils in Scotland to give away responsibility for housing its own people. We may have to thank Margaret Thatcher, at least for putting a section in her bill that meant that housing could never be transferred without the approval of the residents. In a number of areas in Scotland, residents did not approve the transfer. One of the reasons why we cannot release more money for house building in Scotland, which we desperately need, is that millions of pounds of debt still exists throughout the country, to which no Opposition members have referred.

No, I certainly do not agree with that. I vigorously opposed any idea of the tenants transferring, as they hugely supported keeping a local authority as their landlord. They were perfectly happy and content and, furthermore, we could have done with the £1.6 million that it cost to provide glossy brochures to try to persuade them to move to a private landlord or the equivalent. I do not accept Rhoda Grant’s point for a minute.

No, I do not say that at all. However, there is and always has been a need for houses to be built by local government. [Interruption.] Members should hear me out. We were about to transfer housing stock—hundreds and hundreds of houses—for £16 million. Why would we devalue property at that rate? There was deep suspicion in the council and among tenants. That is now being overturned. Part of the problem was that housing stock was transferred in areas where that was not relevant. In a number of areas in Scotland, we are still stuck with the debt. Why was it not waived in any case? What was the problem? If the money was available to clear the housing debt when the stock was transferred, it was clearly available if it was not transferred. I will not go on about that, because I would like to raise a number of other issues. All the issues that the First Minister’s statement addressed relate to care for people in Scotland, be that a roof over their head or clean water to drink. I suspect that, if it were not for the creation of the Scottish Parliament, water would not still be thought of as a public resource and Scottish Water would not still be a public company. Throughout Scotland, one of the inhibitors to the education of our children and the building of schools is the need for local authorities to pay off the enormous debt with which public-private partnerships left them. The Labour Party is quite happy to forget that programme. It claims to have built many hospitals and schools, but it did not. The banks built them and the Labour Party took the credit for it. We are paying for that now. In addition to criticising, the other parties need to be realistic about what Scotland can be ambitious about and what it can achieve. I was aghast when Iain Gray said that he was envious of our First Minister’s ability—I think that I am using his words—to make Scottish institutions bend to his will. How far that is from the kind of governance that this Government would like to see. It is not about making anybody bend to anybody’s will but about finding a way forward in agreement about what is best for every part of Scotland. On the discussion about whether we should be independent, independence is about running the country well and running the country well is about independence. If we run the country well, clearly state our objectives for that and take people with us, that is independence. The fact that we work on the constitution is by the way. We can govern ourselves sufficiently, caring for all the issues that are raised in our programme for the way forward and caring for our own ambition. People might not accept that we can do that, but we can and we have the people to do it. For the first time, we have been given a clear passage to declare that. We do not need any if-only issues about the mere detail. The ambition is to do the best that we can for every man, woman and child in this country.

I welcome the cabinet secretary’s comments, particularly the determination that higher education will continue to be free in this country. I would like to make a suggestion regarding Scotland’s newest university, the University of the Highlands and Islands. A couple of weeks ago—

A couple of weeks ago, the new centre for nordic studies was launched. I wonder whether the cabinet secretary believes, as I do, that there should be better connections between UHI’s northern and island university colleges and the Scandinavian countries.

This increase comes against a backdrop of rises in fuel prices, energy and heating costs, inflation and national insurance contributions and—more significantly—a public sector pay freeze. The Treasury really could not have picked a worse time to introduce the change. What effect does the cabinet secretary think that it could have on an already fragile economy?

I am honoured to be here to serve the people of the Highlands and Islands. I am conscious that, when other members have risen to speak for the first time in this session or to deliver a maiden speech, they have paid tribute to the members who were here before them and wished them well in their future careers. However, I am pleased to say that, in the Highlands and Islands, none has been so displaced. I therefore acknowledge the work of the regional MSP, Peter Peacock, and two constituency MSPs, John Farquhar Munro and Jamie Stone, all of whom have retired. All that we in the Highlands and Islands have done is a kind of gentle reshuffling of the deckchairs, and three new SNP MSPs have moved in where others were before. I enjoyed listening to the cabinet secretary’s speech on the educational aspects of taking Scotland forward, but I would like to concentrate on what I consider to be education beyond school—the extracurricular activities, or education beyond that which Government and Parliament have direct control over, although we have some influence in other ways. Everyone who has spoken has mentioned the economy. In these straitened times, we understand that it is most important that every consideration of expenditure must be about a balanced budget and ways of exerting more pressure to ensure the continuing economic development and growth of our traditional and embryonic industries. However, I suggest that we need to measure our success by more than our gross domestic product. One of the enlightened actions of the Government in the previous session was the creation of the national performance framework, which means that we consider more than economic growth in everything that we do. Properly developed, the framework will be a measuring stick for how we develop socially, for our quality of life and for our wellbeing. It will show more and more whether we are moving further from or nearer to being a more equitable society which, in turn, will bring more prosperity, as is evidenced by other nations. Education is more than what happens in our schools. Recent events have exercised our thinking about sectarianism, but there are a few other boils to lance. Racism, bigotry and homophobia are all contemporary ills that combine to make Scotland a weaker and less equitable nation. Although legislation is a starter for 10, I hope that the Parliament will oversee a culture change in all those ills. I feel that very strongly that, in a country that was so proud of its world-class and first-class education system, children leaving primary school with poor ability in reading and writing must become a thing of the past. Our education system is only as good as its weakest link—not its strongest. Every parent wants their child to succeed in life—in a more equitable society it is possible to believe that that will happen. Getting it right for every child is an essential driver of that ambition. The debate about how we achieve a better Scotland must flow furth of these walls. We do not have all the good ideas—as the First Minister said in his opening speech on the first day of the parliamentary session—which means that we want to share ideas with other members of Parliament. However, we must look beyond Parliament and the 129 people who are elected here. The people of Scotland, our philosophers and thinkers, academics and intellectuals, and the voice of civic Scotland must become involved in the quest for a better Scotland. Parliament and the Government cannot do it without them, nor should we try. Part of our right to education is our right to know our own country—east and west, north and south, mainland and island. Too often our heroes are recognised abroad before they become familiar names here. For too long, discovering Scotland has not been a part of formal education, nor is it still. When Alasdair Gray wrote “Lanark”, which is now considered to be one of the finest books written in the 20th century, it was translated into several different languages before it was heralded and recognised in Scotland. Everyone now knows who Charles Rennie Mackintosh was and could probably identify two or three of his buildings in Glasgow, but what of today’s Charles Rennie Mackintosh? How will we know who he or she is? The people who give our country her identity are the writers, artists, playwrights, poets, singers and philosophers. They reflect our society all the time. They are the eyes, nose and ears—the observers and critics. Earlier this week, a play entitled “Roadkill” won a critics’ award for theatre in Scotland. It is a contemporary play about a contemporary subject—sex trafficking. It packed a fair punch and Ankur Productions, which is a black and ethnic minority company, won the best production award, while Mercy Ojelade took the best female actress award. The country must be proud of those people, but we must also know who they are because they in turn become an inspiration to every primary school child who has the chance to meet, hear and understand them. Scotland is changing. In the Highlands and Islands of not too long ago, education was the route out—get on and get out.

That was true of Scotland as a whole for generation after generation. We declared our people to be our greatest asset and export. That is not now true for the Highlands and Islands nor for Scotland. The change is now measurable. Inward migration is growing, as is the birth rate. The rural schools closure moratorium is to be welcomed and will give reassurance to many parents in rural Scotland. The University of the Highlands and Islands was a long time coming, but it is now a reality.

Further, higher and postgraduate studies are all available across our region. The curriculum for excellence will take Scotland forward. A national performance framework will evidence improvements in the things that matter, and extending the debate to civic Scotland will take Scotland forward, too.