The decision that was taken this week by the City of Edinburgh Council to suspend its licensing regime for saunas has involved work with partner agencies to ensure the safety of those who work in saunas and a number of court actions against the council. Does the cabinet secretary agree that it would have been far better for the decision to have been taken in good time, and in discussion with all those who are affected? Does he accept that the decision represents an example of the single police force imposing a Strathclyde approach to policing and totally ignoring local policing priorities?

With the Parliament’s approval of the Scottish Government’s budget yesterday evening, I can confirm that the Scottish Conservatives will support the order, as it addresses the distribution of the £10.5 billion of local government moneys that have already been agreed. However, the debate provides a useful opportunity to consider the broader issues that surround the funding of our local authorities, particularly the transparency of the process. We face challenging times as a consequence of the necessary action to deal with the deficit and, although welcome signs of strong economic growth are coming through, the Local Government and Regeneration Committee heard much evidence of the financial pressures on all local authorities. Scottish Conservative support was crucial in bringing about the council tax freeze and we have supported its retention to date, as it has proved a lifeline for many hard-pressed and struggling families. That said, a burden has been placed on councils to maintain both the freeze and the front-line services for which they are responsible and, given such circumstances, there is an even greater need for full and frank disclosure of local authority spending priorities. Councils must be accountable to taxpayers. The committee heard evidence that councils are already balancing the delivery of so-called statutory services and discretionary services. However, the cabinet secretary rightly made the point that, instead of choosing which services to deliver, we should be examining how we deliver them. That said, it is critical that decisions on prioritising services are completely transparent. In that respect, there is room for improvement. As the body that represents local authorities, COSLA should be leading by example, which is why its lack of engagement with the committee on its budget discussions was so regrettable. We need to have a dialogue with the organisation if we are to get the fullest picture of what is actually happening on the ground. Indeed, significant shifts are already taking place in councils’ use of fees and charges to fund services. That was not immediately clear from published data, and it took last year’s Accounts Commission for Scotland report to disclose the increasing use of charges as a cash generator. The report revealed that income raised in that way equated to more than half that raised through council tax and was worth £1.3 billion last year. However, the committee found that councils were using net expenditure data, which did not include details on revenue raised from charges and fees. That is neither acceptable nor good practice. We must have clarity on that point and the Government must ensure that councils report fully on where their income is coming from. We also need transparency if we are to monitor local authority progress in growing the income base and encouraging business. I welcome the projected 8.3 per cent real-terms increase in non-domestic rates income, which has been helped in no small measure by the UK Government setting the pace in support for businesses by capping the increase in business rates at 2 per cent. That move has undoubtedly forced the Scottish Government’s hand; indeed, it raises the question of what could be achieved if the Scottish Government were to commit to more of a business growth agenda. That brings us to the business rates incentivisation scheme, which I have to say is an incentivisation scheme like no other for the simple fact that it is bereft of any incentives. Mr Swinney regularly tells us that his hands are bound by COSLA and the local authorities, although one suspects that it might be a bond of convenience. Given that the 2012-13 targets are still to be revised and the 2013-14 targets have yet to be published, the goalposts have been not so much shifted as locked away in the changing rooms. Although we support the order this afternoon, we also seek action from local authorities and the Scottish Government to improve accountability in and transparency of future funding.

5. To ask the Scottish Government when it last met Historic Scotland and what issues were discussed. (S4O-02861)

Given the concerns about the recent planning application at Culloden and yesterday’s call-in of the decision over New Lanark, both of which involve hugely important historical sites, does the cabinet secretary retain full confidence in the organisation and the statutory framework within which it operates? Furthermore, has she sought assurances from Historic Scotland that its procedures for investigating the potential impact of planning decisions are suitably robust? It is critical that we demonstrate that safeguards are in place if we are to secure world heritage site status for the Forth bridge.

A number of interesting speeches have been made, not least of which was that of my Conservative colleague Liz Smith, though I might show bias there. When we consider the legacy in sporting terms—I accept that the debate has demonstrated that there are broader issues—there must be a joined-up approach if we are to make a lasting difference. The previous Scottish city to host the Commonwealth games was Edinburgh, in 1986 and in 1970, which three of us here remember. In 1986, the opening ceremony’s theme was the spirit of youth—back then, I could still say what that felt like. However, we should perhaps reflect on what the legacy of those games was, apart from Robert Maxwell. In 2007, a proposal was made—it seems incredible now—to demolish Meadowbank stadium, which hosted the games. That was ultimately rejected after a well-organised campaign to save the facility. Thankfully, the ageing stadium now seems to have a bright future, following the City of Edinburgh Council’s commitment to revamp it. In 2007, a sporting campaign called unite the clubs was also launched. It was a grass-roots campaign that involved football, rugby and other sports clubs that regularly use sports facilities in Edinburgh, which wanted better changing and park facilities. It culminated in a march on Parliament on Valentine’s day in 2007 and succeeded in forcing local politicians to look again at the provision of facilities for those clubs in the city. I highlight those two events because it is pretty sobering to bear it in mind that, about 20 years after the Commonwealth games came to Edinburgh, the stadium that hosted them and the sports facilities in it were nearly lost, and amateur sportsmen and women were clamouring for investment in crumbling changing rooms and waterlogged pitches—we can just look at the cycle track, for example. We have come a long way since then, but we cannot lose sight of the fact that participation in competitive sport must remain a priority for this Scottish Government and its successors. The Scottish Government’s research on the potential legacy has shown that the trickle-down effect cannot be relied on and that there must be engagement with community organisations and grass-roots sports clubs to bring about real change. Again, that shows the need for a joined-up approach. Accordingly, we should be looking at what the barriers are for those who already take part in competitive sports and those who are looking to get involved. Alison Johnstone and Liz Smith identified issues such as pricing for the use of facilities and opening up existing facilities in communities—in schools, for example, which are very underused at certain times—so that they are more widely available. To me, the operators are the critical organisations in that respect. In the Lothians, that is Edinburgh Leisure, which is an arm’s-length organisation. Bodies such as Edinburgh Leisure must do more to improve access for those who wish to become involved in sports and—this is just as important—for those who already participate and volunteer in our football and rugby clubs. After all, grass-roots sport simply would not exist without those people. The Health and Sport Committee’s report on support for community sport highlighted some of the challenges that our local clubs face. In its evidence to the committee, the Scottish Sports Association explained that the average membership of our sports clubs was around 60 members, whereas in Europe the number could be anywhere between 600 and 6,000. That, in turn, means that, whereas larger clubs will have the resources for professionals, smaller clubs almost entirely depend on volunteers. As many members have mentioned, we should be focusing on those volunteers, because they are the bedrock of our clubs and they have a big role in engaging with their communities and driving up participation in competitive sport. Alison Johnstone also made that point. Competitive sport is vital. Few people think that it is not right. Children love it. Indeed, everybody likes competition, which should be essential in schools. As the minister highlighted in her evidence to the committee, the last thing that we want is young people who have been enthused by the Commonwealth games turning up to their local sports club to find a lack of opportunities to take part or of qualified people to look after them. That is a vital issue. A number of members, including Patricia Ferguson, highlighted the wider benefits of the Commonwealth games throughout Scotland. The important message is that they offer an opportunity and impetus for improvement across Scotland, not just in Glasgow. We have heard that from many members, and there is already clear evidence of that. The Royal Commonwealth pool in Edinburgh, which is another reminder of Scotland’s previous stint at hosting the games, has been fully refurbished and has been able to attract the diving world series last year and the Commonwealth games this year. Scotland is a small country and needs only one big pool, really, and Glasgow and Edinburgh are very near. All Commonwealth games and, indeed, the Olympics need only one pool. Businesses across Scotland will benefit from the millions of pounds-worth of contracts that are being awarded. However, the issue is measuring the real long-term benefit that such investment brings beyond the immediate spend on infrastructure and services. The legacy evidence of previous large-scale events is mixed. It strikes me that the best opportunities for individuals and businesses are in using the experience of the games to drive up standards, and rethink and perhaps develop the services and products that they have to offer. The future of the Commonwealth games as they are is in doubt, so we will have to do something. In 2018, Gold Coast City in Australia will host the games. There are many notes of interest for 2022, but no real bids have been made. Should we cut down the games or simply cut them adrift? Nobody is bidding for them because of their cost and scale. Minor sports are just as important as the blue-ribbon events, such as athletics and swimming. We have to focus on those and on the minor sports. A number of events are piggybacking on the games, such as the Commonwealth nations bridge championship, which will take place just after them. We should bear those in mind, as well, as they will help to enhance the legacy of the games. I support the amendment that was lodged by Liz Smith MSP.

A number of speeches in the debate highlighted the importance of our local businesses to our town centres. As my colleague Gavin Brown made clear, the Scottish Government must do more on rates relief and we must have concrete progress on business rates incentivisation. We need a healthy environment for small businesses to thrive, not only to encourage start-ups, although that is important, but to support the businesses that are already trading. I say that because, for many people, the objective is not simply to attract and sustain businesses but to achieve a mix of different shops and services. I was interested to note that, in the Portas review in England, particular attention was paid to the high proportion of betting shops in our communities, particularly in deprived areas. At the same time, a Competition Commission report in 2008 found a significant decline in the old staples of the high street, including independent grocers, bakers and butchers. People complain to me that every high street looks the same. If we go to a small town in America or Italy, we see local shops, not chains, run by local people. Variety is the key word. We cannot legislate for it, but we can encourage it. It is important not merely for cosmetic reasons but because choice and quality products and services are the key to attracting people to the high street. There is broad agreement that our town centres are losing out to out-of-town developments and large supermarkets. Accordingly, it is crucial that we create a level playing field and give small businesses the means to compete and not only provide local employment but give consumers a genuine choice when it comes to their shopping. For that to happen, we need to provide not only a competitive business rates regime but the facilities to draw people back into town centres. That includes park and ride. In that respect, I welcome the movement on planning towards a presumption in favour of town centres. We must give local authorities the means to breathe life back into our high streets. Flexibility in the planning system is crucial to that, but we need more than planning reform to deliver much-needed town centre facilities. When we speak to people about why they do not visit their local high street at present, one of the key reasons that is often cited is the difficulties in getting there. Although we must encourage sustainable transport where possible, including park and ride, the lack of parking facilities in many town centres, even for five minutes to stop and pick something up, is a big issue. As Alison Johnstone said, if someone is going to shop online and pick something up at lunch time, for example, they need to get into the town. That is why out-of-town centres are often attractive in comparison. To deliver that sort of change, we need to provide financial resources. It is regrettable that we are not coming up with the funding to provide those much-needed facilities, whether it be for parking or for making it easier for people to travel via public transport. I come again to the point about the level playing field. We must make it just as easy and just as attractive to go to the high street as to the nearest retail park. I hope that our town centre guru can take that point on board. A great deal can be done to support our town centres, but the Government must start by taking action on business rates and giving local businesses a fighting chance. We cannot legislate to stop every high street having the same multiples, but we can stop certain shops proliferating. We cannot prevent payday lenders from opening a shop, but we can legislate against too many of them opening. The same is true with betting shops.

The City of Edinburgh Council (Portobello Park) Bill will change the law in order to allow the City of Edinburgh Council to appropriate Portobello park to build a school. The Parliament is being asked to approve that straightforward principle today—nothing more, nothing less. It is important that we do not lose sight of the fact that the public realise what the bill is really about. I do not think that it is about the need for a new school, which we all agree on. A number of us have received correspondence from residents who are concerned about the bill. The question of the competency of the private bill was raised: specifically, correspondence cited the guidance on private bills, which requires that such bills should not be considered if a statutory remedy is not necessary or if a change to the general public law would be more appropriate. In the context of the former point, some people have raised the alternative sites that are open to the city council for a new school. However, I do not think that it is appropriate for the Parliament to visit that matter in depth, particularly as the council voted unanimously to pursue the Portobello park option via the private bill route. We must accept that Portobello park is the best option for the school. The second objection to the bill’s competency was made in relation to whether other legal solutions were more appropriate. From the evidence that was presented to the committee, I note that there is broad agreement that such options are non-starters and that a statutory solution such as the bill is the only way forward. However, within that broad agreement, there was a contention that a change to the law on appropriation of common good land should be made through a public bill. I share the committee’s view that, given the particular set of circumstances surrounding the new Portobello high school, it is both necessary and acceptable to pursue the private bill option. Beyond those technical objections, a key concern has been raised by a number of people—namely, the wider implications of the bill as regards common good land. We need to take those concerns seriously, and it is in the best interests of all concerned—including those of us who support the bill—that we demonstrate that no such danger exists, due to the specific area of law that the bill addresses. We must be clear about precisely which area of law the bill relates to. It is not about the broad issue of safeguards for common good land, so we should leave that aside. The bill is about the land at Portobello park and that land alone. The bill concerns the principle of appropriation of inalienable common good land. Indeed, more specifically still, the bill is about the appropriation of such land for the city council’s education authority functions. There are a number of reasons why I do not expect more local authorities to introduce other private bills on the back of this one, although that is what everybody is afraid of. Of course, one key point is that private bills are not commonplace or straightforward in any case, especially when we consider the constraints on parliamentary time. Beyond that point, the appropriation of inalienable common good land for the purposes of education is such a narrow issue that it is not likely to affect many other cases for the time being. The question whether such cases may be more common in the future, given school building programmes, has been raised in evidence. In that context, I agree with the committee’s conclusion that the bill is so narrowly focused on the issue of a school on Portobello park that it is difficult to see how it could lead to a broader presumption in favour of appropriation. Indeed, I think that the broader effect of the bill—if there is any at all—will be that the issues around appropriation will be properly debated and discussed and a mechanism for adjudicating similar disputes will be adopted for the future, which is no bad thing. In effect, we are discussing a legal anomaly. Local authorities cannot appropriate inalienable common good land but they can dispose of it with court permission. It became an issue following local government reorganisation in 1996. Prior to that, district councils could dispose of inalienable common good land to regional councils, as they were the education authorities. Indeed, such an example was cited in Wishaw, within the old Strathclyde Regional Council. However, following local authority reorganisation, that was no longer an option. Therefore, we have arrived at a position where a local authority can dispose of, sell off and develop inalienable common good land with court permission, but it cannot use the land to provide much-needed and long-overdue school premises, as it has no power, and there is no legal process of adjudication, should it wish to do so. It seems, on a point of principle, unfair to allow such an anomaly to stand in the way of a new school that we know is much needed. As we have heard, and as the committee found, the private bill route is the best option for resolving the very specific set of circumstances in Portobello. The bill gives the City of Edinburgh Council a mechanism to appropriate Portobello park, as the case highlights that there is no existing means for it legally to do so. Because of the obvious need for a school and because we can satisfy ourselves that, realistically, there is little danger of setting a wider precedent due to the focus on Portobello park and the very particular circumstances surrounding it, we have no good reason to oppose the bill. Indeed, given the desperate need for a new school, we support it.

I will pick up on a few of the points that were made in this afternoon’s debate, which has been constructive. Elaine Murray raised the issue whether the bill somehow circumvents the 2012 judgment of the Court of Session. I refer to the important point that the committee made, that it is for the courts to apply and interpret the law and for the Parliament to legislate to change it when it is appropriate to do so. This is one such occasion. The court judgment highlighted what many of the experts have pointed out, including Roy Martin QC, who described in his oral evidence to the committee the anomaly whereby the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 allows the disposal of land with the consent of the courts, but not appropriation for another use. I mentioned that in my opening speech. I do not accept the argument of those who seem to believe that, when the court finds such an anomaly, it is for the Parliament to sit back and blithely accept it. Indeed, as I argued previously, although I do not see many similar cases coming to the fore in the short term, the principle should be addressed for the sake of consistency in the future. I note the criticism of the process, which is not entirely unfounded. As everybody has said, there were shortcomings in the council’s consultation on the bill. It is extremely regrettable that fundamental mistakes were made with the organisation of the consultation. Indeed, the previous administration of the city council has by no means covered itself in glory over the whole affair. Evidence to the committee demonstrated that as far back as 2006 there were indications that the status of the land and the council’s right to appropriate it would be challenged in the courts. Why it was not done then, we have no idea. Given the inevitability of that court challenge, the fact that the council proceeded with the planning and delivery process solely on the basis of legal advice, regardless of how expert that was, meant that the project was always going to be a hostage to fortune. The land’s status and the council’s rights in that regard should have been established definitively long before the 2012 Court of Session judgment. There has been some discussion about the effects of this contentious issue on the Portobello community. I understand the concerns of those within the community—and indeed people further afield—about the loss of common good land, or any parkland, in our cities and towns. As Alison Johnstone said, such land is of tremendous value, and we have less and less of it, so it is important. However, I do not think that that is the issue here. The issue is not about common land but about the school. We all agree that it is an excellent school, which is well founded and has great sporting abilities and a great future. However, Portobello needs a new school. The important thing is the commitment of the City of Edinburgh Council to designate the existing site of the Portobello high school as a new park or similar recreation facility and give it Fields in Trust status. That undertaking is critical and we must hold the council to account over it. Its importance can hardly be overstated, as it means that the overall loss of green space within Portobello will be kept to a minimum. Many have talked about the reason that we are here today considering Portobello park as a stand-alone case and not delaying for a general review of the legislation in the area of alienable common good land. That reason is the desperate and urgent need for a new school building in Portobello and the fact that we cannot delay the project any longer. Portobello’s high school is a good school: staff and pupils work hard and should be proud of their good reputation in the city. However, we have to question how we can produce confident learners and instil pupils with that all-important sense of belief and persuade them of their worth when at the same time we continue to teach them in a building that is not fit for purpose and is in desperate need of replacing. Quite simply, we cannot dismiss the effect that learning in such an environment has on the school ethos. It is because the pupils of Portobello deserve a new school now and because there are no good reasons to oppose the bill that I am pleased to confirm my support.

I am pleased to speak in the stage 1 debate on the Bankruptcy and Debt Advice (Scotland) Bill and I thank the Economy, Energy and Tourism Committee for its deliberations. The bill is complex and has many facets, but it is important to keep in mind the overall object of the game. For me, there is a balance to be struck. Statutory debt solutions should be the means of last resort and should encourage, as much as possible, the payment of debts. That is not simply a point of principle. It is important to bear in mind that not all creditors are faceless multinationals who can easily absorb bad debts. We know that the individuals who seek statutory debt solutions might be entrepreneurs, so we should also be aware that creditors might include small and medium-sized enterprises, for whom default on a debt is not an easy burden to bear. That said, we must shy away from a punitive system of bankruptcy and debt management. In that context, I was interested in some of the findings in the European Commission’s 2011 report on entrepreneurs, which made key points about rehabilitating people who have been through the bankruptcy process and preventing the fear and stigma attached to the process from being a barrier to future entrepreneurs. We might be surprised by how many of Scotland’s most successful businesspeople faced a very difficult time, particularly in the start-up phase. Accordingly, we should not lose sight of the fact that the difference between a failed entrepreneur and the next big enterprise success story can be very fine indeed. We have many examples in Scotland, such as Michelle Mone; abroad, examples include Calvin Klein and Ralph Lauren. On the face of it, the bill appears to strike a balance, and I am minded to support it. However there are details that need clarification and further consideration. An issue that must be reviewed is the extension of the period during which a debtor contribution may be made from 36 to 48 months, which members mentioned. If we want to strike a balance between the interests of debtors and those of creditors, the provision is unusual, because there seems to be little evidence that the change will benefit either group. I would be interested in hearing more about that. The technical committee of the Association of Business Recovery Professionals questioned the benefit to creditors, and charities such as StepChange Debt Charity raised the real prospect of broken repayment arrangements and increasing debt defaults. Indeed, a number of bodies pointed out that the only certainty that the change would bring would be the consequential payment of trustee fees, a point that I am sure is unrelated to the Insolvency Practitioners Association’s broad support for the proposal. Given that the proposal was omitted from the initial consultation, and given that many respondents to the committee commented on the lack of evidence to support the change, the Government must carefully consider its position.

That is a difficult question for me to answer as I was not on the committee. On the debt advice aspect, I am sure that many other members will draw attention to the weight of evidence pointing to how the free money advice sector will cope with any extra demand. I am aware that the Government’s position is that we are looking at an estimated 6 to 8 per cent increase in the volume of cases that are dealt with. However, as a number of groups that gave evidence pointed out, many free advice providers are already at capacity and, regardless of how small the added increase may appear, there is no more room at the debt advice inn. The other feature of our debt solution framework that the bill must ensure is that there is a good deal of flexibility. That issue apparently cropped up in relation to a number of different aspects, the most obvious of which is the proposed common financial tool. As the committee report stated, there must be scope to “amend, qualify and justify the data around the debtors’ income and expenditure”. The Law Society of Scotland was among those who warned of the dangers of such a tool becoming too prescriptive. We should heed those warnings. Indeed, it is that same sense of flexibility that would seem to drive the Government to formalise arrangements over payment breaks—another aspect that we broadly welcomed. Of course, the danger is that in making statutory provision for such breaks we lose the degree of flexibility that is already there in practice. We must therefore have clarity from the Government on how it will ensure that there is sufficient scope with its proposals to adapt to debtors’ changing circumstances. The one issue in the bill on which there is a clear difference of view between the committee and the Government is the ending of automatic discharge, which will have to be reconsidered at stage 2. We would all agree with the Government’s motive to provide a stronger link between debtor co-operation and discharge. However, there was a great deal of evidence about the difficulties of objectively judging whether someone has been co-operative, particularly when judged against the proposed statement of undertaking. Again, there must be sufficient flexibility in the proposals for those who are affected by changes in circumstances. Any moves to remove automatic discharge should be approached with extreme caution. While I wait for the Government to clarify its position on a number of those issues, I am content to support the general principles of the bill at stage 1.

The minister is aware that, in my region, the City of Edinburgh Council and West Lothian Council held elections in October, following which one community council in Edinburgh and five in West Lothian were disbanded due to lack of interest—albeit that West Lothian Council now states that it is confident that at least two will reform. Will he advise precisely what the Improvement Service is doing to address the matter and to prevent further loss of our important community councils?

I am pleased to contribute to this debate on the results of the 2011 census, which is in fact the 23rd census. The results of the census inform and shape the future of public policy in a number of areas. However, when one considers how the questions have changed over time and the type of information that we have collected in the past, it is clear that changes in society are as much reflected in the questions asked as they are in the answers received. Indeed, the first census of 1801 had a strong focus on identifying manpower for the navy and militia and on ensuring that there was a sufficient supply of corn to feed the populace. Of course, these days the census is very much about planning for the future provision of our public services and public policy in general, and in that context there are some very interesting initial findings. For instance, the fact that Edinburgh has seen an 18 per cent increase in children under the age of five raises significant questions about primary places in the capital. Only a month ago, parents across the city were warned that there was little chance of their child getting a place anywhere other than their local primary. We now have confirmation that the situation is not set to improve anytime soon and indeed there could be worse in store. In that respect, the census merely backs up the trends that we already have empirical and anecdotal evidence of.

Certainly I agree, but we are seeing an awful lot of school closures at the same time, and those two things do not go together. The problem is that people want their children to go to the good schools, not the bad schools—that is part of the mindset. The census backs up the trends and, although we have a lot of young people in Edinburgh, our population is ageing. At the Local Government and Regeneration Committee we have consistently had evidence of that change and the pressures it is placing on already stretched health and social care budgets, which is the very point that Patricia Ferguson made. I was interested to note the statistics on marital status, which, at first glance, seem quite straightforward. There has been a 5 per cent drop in those who are married and a corresponding increase of 5 per cent in those who are single. Indeed, I would encourage anyone who is single to visit Edinburgh in my region. Edinburgh boasts a population, 45 per cent of which is single—it is behind only Glasgow and Dundee in the lonely heart stakes—so aspiring romantics should head for the capital, where they are bound to meet like-minded singletons. Whether they like them is another matter, for which I am not responsible. However, here lies a warning. We are waiting for the publication of further Scottish Government statistics and even when we have all the evidence to hand we should be careful in extrapolating any trends or interpreting the data. For example, within the marriage statistics, the “single” label is used in a fairly strict legal sense and basically refers to anyone who has not yet married or entered a civil partnership. Anyone who identifies themselves as having a partner is included in the single category, which changes the dynamic of the statistic entirely. For the purposes of planning and general information gathering, I would suggest that it is of far greater use to know how many couples are out there, rather than how many are legally married or not. The old adage of there being lies, damned lies and statistics holds true, and we should approach the data with suitable caution. We must also be aware of the broader limitations of the census and we should not read too much into it. Given its comprehensive nature, it gives us a valuable insight, particularly into the groups, both geographical and demographic, that are sometimes overlooked. However, that comprehensiveness of population knowledge comes at a price. The census must strike a balance between seeking information and not seeking so much that it becomes off-putting for those who fill in the forms and too costly and complex to process the results. Hence we have a strict approach to the questions that are considered and the associated tick-box answers. Although I see no alternative to that approach, we cannot overlook the problems that it throws up. There was some controversy over the religious question in 2011, with the British Humanist Association campaigning to encourage people who were not actively religious to say so. Indeed its campaign argued that the religious question was a cultural identifier as opposed to a question about active or passive worship. That is an important point. I need hardly say that religion and people’s feelings towards it are complex. I suggest that having relatively simplistic questions on the subject means that a good deal of wriggle room is left for subjective answers. Put simply, the question may be written the same way on every census form, but it will not be read with the same uniformity. Leading on from that point, I would contend that the very active campaign by the BHA means that it is very difficult now to point to any changes in the figures on religious observance and talk with absolute certainty about changes in the number of those who are practising religion. Some people may well have answered that question differently because of not a change in their behaviour but, rather, a change in their interpretation of the question. I am not questioning the trend but raising the issue whether people are identifying less and less with a religion, and drawing attention to the fact that the census form is perhaps not the medium to gather data about such a complex issue.

How can the member say he is Scottish with that Maurice Chevalier accent?

It has been a valuable debate, in which even Fiona Hyslop managed to find some favourable points from the report by the Institute for Fiscal Studies, which impressed me greatly. I talked about the fact that there are lies, damned lies and statistics, which was borne out by the dependent Mr Stevenson. I do not know whether there have been 23 censuses in total, but it is certainly the case that there have been 23 modern censuses. I cannot count the Domesday book as one. Two point seven per cent of people identified themselves as “White: Polish”, which is more than double the national average; heaven knows how many French people there were. The good news is that we are attracting economic migrants but, as many members have said, we must ensure that we are planning to provide extra resources, particularly in education, to ensure that our public services can respond to demographic change. The debate has produced a number of interpretations of the statistics and a variety of comment on the picture of Scotland that it paints. I discussed some of the shortcomings that I found with the census, but the debate has highlighted one other fundamental flaw with the questionnaire. It tells us who is answering, when they travel, where they work, what they work as, what they believe and a multitude of other things, but it cannot tell us why. That is for us to interpret, extrapolate and guess at. I am thinking, in particular, of the transport infrastructure debate, in which I called for a joined-up strategy to ensure that people can get where they want, how they want and when they want. When we have a questionnaire that tells us that someone generally travels to work by car, the great unknown for us as policy makers is the reason or reasons why they have overlooked public transport. That is the sort of information that is invaluable in the design of public services. The other issue that flows from that and from the debate in general is what the future holds for the census. There has been some discussion about possible alternatives, including an e-census or an administrative census. Although a number of members have identified some of the failings of the existing system, I hope that we do not throw out the baby with the bath water with a change that is too dramatic. The invaluable aspect of the present census is its comprehensive coverage and the fact that, for the past 50 or 60 years, the same questions—more or less—have been asked. I would have to be persuaded that any administrative alternative would achieve the same result and that there would not be groups that would be missed out. It is clear that the potential of an e-census is worth exploring further, because increasing difficulties are already being experienced in engaging with certain groups, such as young men. Anything that makes the census more accessible and easy to fill in must be looked at. We must consider all the options that are available to us and what will deliver the most comprehensive and useful data for policy makers. In the meantime, I am content to welcome the census and the results that it throws up and, for that reason, I will support the Government motion and Patricia Ferguson’s amendment.

I thank Colin Keir for bringing this subject to Parliament for debate. When we consider its origins, it is hard to envisage Edinburgh zoo and its associated conservation projects without the drive and vision of Thomas Gillespie, of whom we have just heard. It is only right that, when celebrating the success of the Royal Zoological Society of Scotland, we record our gratitude and appreciation for his efforts. His determination in setting up the society is quite inspiring, especially when we bear in mind that an earlier zoo that was set up in Edinburgh had failed. I was interested to note that one of the biggest barriers back then to establishing a zoo was the inclement weather, which was “considered unsuitable for exotic beasts.” As a not-so-exotic beast who also struggles slightly with the weather, I have some sympathy with their plight. Joking aside, the continued success and scale of work that is done by the zoo is great testament to Thomas Gillespie’s efforts. It strikes me that this 100-year celebration is an opportunity to raise the profile of the Royal Zoological Society and the scale and breadth of the conservation and research work that it carries out. Some of the projects and research that are going on are fascinating and I am sure that they would be of interest to a lot of people. I refer in particular to the strides that are being made in veterinary science. In preparation for this debate, I read all about minimal invasive surgery on wildlife, which is perhaps more familiarly known as keyhole surgery. It is a significant, ground-breaking area of research. Quite simply, the less invasive the surgery, the easier the recovery and the lower the chance of post-surgical complications. The same applies to humans. That work has led to, among other things, keyhole surgery to remove the gall bladders of Asiatic black bears in south-east Asia. That is all quite extraordinary when we consider that it was not that long ago that keyhole surgery on humans was pretty cutting edge. Of course, not all of the work that is done by the RZSS is so far flung and exotic. One of the most familiar projects, which we have just heard about, is the Scottish beaver trial, which is an interesting example of how research can be used. Given that beavers tend to adapt their surroundings, there is the potential to attract more species and provide food sources for other animals. Accordingly, the implications of the trial and what it means for other species and the environment are significant. It also goes to show that the benefits of the RZSS are not limited to Edinburgh or to the species that the project is specifically designed to study. The beaver project will undoubtedly bring tourists and, with them, opportunities for local businesses, all of which I am sure will be very welcome. All those projects contribute to the Royal Zoological Society’s overall mission of raising awareness of conservation—that is what is so important about zoos—and encouraging an interest in rare and endangered animals and an appreciation of wildlife. As members have noted, one of the key success stories in that regard has been the zoo’s work with pandas. Why did Edinburgh zoo get the pandas? It was because it was so successful. Many of us are now familiar—perhaps overly so—with the mating rituals of those wonderful creatures. Indeed, Edinburgh zoo’s pandas are the only celebrity couple in whose sex life it is acceptable to take a keen interest. One of the key reasons why the zoo was able to attract the pandas was its reputation in veterinary science. Accordingly, I hope that the Royal Zoological Society continues to capture the interest of the public and encourage a future generation of vets, conservationists and naturalists to come forward. Furthermore, I hope that this debate and the attention that these 100th birthday celebrations bring will deliver some of the recognition that Thomas Gillespie deserves for his incredible contribution to the city of Edinburgh and conservation worldwide.

Members have raised a variety of important points, but I will focus my comments on one or two aspects of our future strategy. The Government’s motion is very much focused on the investment that has been made in our transport infrastructure. However, as welcome as that is, it must be matched by a comprehensive and joined-up strategy in order to drive sustainable economic growth, and the strategy must focus on the commuter. It has been some time since the Scottish Government’s previous national transport strategy was launched—I think that it was in 2006—but one of the strategy’s key aims was the improvement of journey times and connections. That was welcome, and improvements have undoubtedly been made as a result, but there are clear weaknesses. For example, it has been noted that the Edinburgh gateway tram and rail interchange at Gogar represents a missed opportunity for a park-and-ride facility. Similarly, the newly opened Bathgate to Airdrie rail link has led to a significant increase in traffic at Bathgate train station and, although the station is only three years old, it appears that the parking capacity is insufficient. That just goes to show how important it is to think through all the implications of future infrastructure spending. I am no great fan of management buzzwords, but nonetheless we need a joined-up approach to transport planning. The approach of improving connections that the existing Government strategy calls for is far too narrow; there is a need for a more comprehensive but individually focused plan. We need to start with the basics and ask: who is travelling? Where are they going? How do they want to get there? What is preventing them from doing that? How can we make it easier? We need to know not only who uses the train but who is not using it and why. How are they getting to the train station? Are there people who would take their bike if the facilities and bicycle routes were safer? All those questions need to be asked. The commuter must be at the centre of any joined-up transport strategy, and we must understand the entirety of their journey from door to door and what can be done to make it quicker and easier. I feel that we can make a good deal of easy improvements at relatively low cost; large-scale investment in infrastructure is not the only route to improvement. Future transport needs, as well as present demands, should also be about shaping policy. Rail Future Scotland is already lobbying for the restoration of double track on heavily used and high-frequency routes such as the recently extended Milngavie line. I was interested in the recent comments of Paul Tetlaw of Transform Scotland, who described the Highland main line as a “slimmed down Victorian railway” and called for the twin tracking of the route and electrification, which I think was a personal commitment of the First Minister at the most recent general election. Such points raise questions about whether we are future proofing existing infrastructure projects such as the Borders rail link, for which only three stretches are twin tracked. The Campaign for Borders Rail and Transform Scotland have already criticised the proposed construction along the rail line of bridges that are suitable for only a single-track line, rightly questioning the consequences for overall capacity in the future. We must avoid a situation in which we build infrastructure that is at capacity within a few years and there is then a need for costly expansion and improvement. Obviously, we cannot peer into the future, and we do not have inexhaustible resources, but we must look to deliver the best possible value for the taxpayer, and that will not be achieved by building infrastructure with a limited fit-for-purpose lifespan. In some ways, this is one of the biggest challenges in planning transport infrastructure—to make sure that it will fit our future needs rather than our existing ones. It is also important to accept that the Scottish Government cannot deliver a comprehensive transport strategy on its own but needs to work with local authorities on planning and delivery. Resources must be directed according to local priorities that are determined by councils, and their use should not be dictated by central Government. In that context, it is important to keep a close eye on what local authorities are doing with the money that is available to them through things such as cycling, walking and safer streets budgets. We must accept that it is for local authorities to decide where their transport priorities lie, and we must not attempt to pedal in ring fencing by the back door. That said, I note that cycling is a priority for some local authorities. In Edinburgh, there is a need to make it safer and easier to get around the city, and I welcome the steps that have already been taken. As a keen cyclist—although not so much recently, as members may imagine—I support action in the area. In my extensive travels to Europe on business, I have seen the facilities and initiatives that can be used to encourage safer cycling. I regret to say that, as with so many other forms of physical exercise, they do it with much more style on the continent. The biggest barrier to cycling in Scotland seems to be the perception that it is dangerous, which is almost certainly a result of recent high-profile fatalities. That is why we need to think a good deal more about how we can offer a safe environment for cyclists. I was interested to note that, last week, London’s mayor Boris Johnson launched a new stretch of London’s cycle superhighway, which is fully segregated from other traffic. The cycling campaign group Spokes has already called for segregated cycle lanes, and that is one of the ideas that we should be fully considering.

We must ensure that the funding that is available is put to the best possible use.

I welcome the debate that the Infrastructure and Capital Investment Committee has brought. There seems to be great agreement among everyone about what should be done, but it is important that we note that the measure of success will be whether that leads to a comprehensive strategy on improving community transport. There has been much discussion to date but little in the way of action—as the old nursery rhyme goes, the debate on the bus goes round and round. Members have highlighted areas of concern. A few key points need addressed if we are to make progress. First, we must have a better idea of what is happening on the ground in community transport services. Submissions to the committee highlighted the lack of information about the current coverage and state of health of services. That said, the consensus is that community transport is very important in our communities, particularly for those dealing with social isolation who cannot access the mainstream bus services. However, we have no idea how vital these services are, who is reliant on them or how they would cope if the services were not there. Inevitably, some groups would benefit significantly from access to community transport but are currently missing out. Moreover, those groups may have access to funds and volunteer support that could be used to support existing community bus and car-sharing schemes. Accordingly, a detailed study or audit of services that analyses what services are available and how well used they are is a must. From there, we can progress. The most obvious area for improvement is the co-ordination and organisation of existing services. Although there will inevitably be gaps in the service, I feel sure that there will be neighbourhoods in which a number of people use different community travel services. Therefore, there must be scope for greater efficiency. There has been criticism of the lack of joined-up working and co-ordination of approach, particularly by Audit Scotland. However, there have also been some successes. Polis is a European organisation that works with local authorities and regions to support better transport through improved technology and transport policies. It hailed the MyBus service that is operated by Strathclyde partnership for transport as a good example of demand-responsive transport—buses that turn up where you want them when you want them. The MyBus service impressed due to its joined-up approach and co-ordinated service, which goes to show that there is already good organisation and management practice out there that we can draw on and share. Moreover, the attention that the service is receiving from EU policy makers shows that we are not alone in looking at how community travel can be used in an overall transport strategy. As I said, co-ordination will bring better use of existing resources, but there are significant concerns about the lack of funding for and investment in the sector. I was struck by the number of submissions that complained about the quality and age of minibuses and the on-going cost of the D1 licence training, which my colleague Alex Johnstone mentioned. That is a stark reminder that action is required now, because the problem will only get worse, as many members have pointed out. That brings me to the issue of how we fund the community transport sector. We would all agree in principle with Age Scotland’s campaign to extend the national concessionary travel scheme to include community transport. I am confident that, were it simple to do so, we would go down that path. However, it is not so straightforward. Submissions to the committee highlighted that the scheme would compete unfairly with existing bus services and that money would also have to be found for ticketing machines and software to allow the monitoring of passengers, as the minister rightly pointed out. Accordingly, I think that we must move aside on that issue and consider other solutions. It is encouraging that, in the submissions that the committee received, there were a number of proposals for how we could make things easier for the community transport sector. For example, Lothian Community Transport Services, which is based in my region, made the practical proposal that we simplify the application process for a bus service operators grant, which is based on the eligible distance travelled and fuel consumed as a result and which benefits passengers by keeping fares lower. Small, simple ideas such as that might not look earth shattering but, as a whole, could make a big difference to the people who run the services, many of whom are volunteers. I was also struck by the suggestion from the City of Edinburgh Council of piloting a buddy system between commercial bus companies and tour operators, and community transport groups, such as we heard about in the Highlands and Islands. The suggestion is that things such as mechanical support could be shared and that the cost of purchasing through such companies would be cheaper. That not only seems worthy of consideration but highlights the potential contribution of commercial operators, which, to my mind, has been slightly lacking until now. Given that those companies are already partners in the NCT scheme, there may be an opportunity to use them to ensure that the community transport groups also benefit from the available funds. The other reason why commercial bus companies should form part of the discussion is that the debate is not simply about the future of community transport but about the contribution that it could make to a coherent local transport strategy in our communities. As so many respondents to the committee noted, the demand for community transport services and their design tends to be circumscribed through existing bus routes. I am not referring to the blighted trams—I was going to use a profanity, but I did not. Accordingly, we should, at the very least, encourage a dialogue between the two—community transport and mainstream bus route operators—especially when community transport has the potential to drive up overall public transport. If we are moving towards community transport taking on a more strategic role within overall transport planning, we must be prepared to put our money where our mouths are. If these groups are to retain staff and invest in new buses, equipment and staff training, they need certainty about funding. We must address that issue while ensuring value for money for the taxpayer and overall accountability. We have arrived at this debate very much on the back of the campaign to extend the NCT scheme. Although we may have exposed the difficulties with that approach, we must not allow that to halt progress. It is clear that there are a number of ways in which we can make better use of resources and better support community transport groups. Above all else, we must have leadership on the issue from the Government, and we must identify and implement solutions.

The applause that I received after my swearing in and the silence that came before it were, I think, due to the relief that I had made it, as opposed to my presence. I believe that it was Ronald Reagan who remarked: “It has been said that politics is the second oldest profession. I have learned that it bears a striking resemblance to the first.” I have now experienced one of those professions, and I am happy to confirm that it is quite enough for me. On a serious note, to take on the role of an MSP is pretty daunting, as everyone in the chamber will know. The support that I have received and the kindness shown by members from all sides of the chamber—and, more widely, by the parliamentary staff—have made this challenge so much easier. I express my sincere thanks to everyone. We would all wish, myself included, that there had not been a vacancy for me to fill, given the terribly sad circumstances in which it came about. There have already been many fine tributes paid to David McLetchie in the chamber and I hope that members will understand if I, too, take a minute to remember him. I knew David well, and I considered him a good friend. I could always rely on his encyclopaedic knowledge of popular music to whittle away the hours spent on the campaign trail. I am told by my Scottish Conservative colleagues that there were two reasons for going to David’s office: either for advice, or because you were in trouble. It was not unheard of to go and see David expecting the former only to find out that, to your horror, you were very much in store for the latter. I can honestly say that I would dearly have loved to call in and see my friend for either of those things in the past few weeks. I know how highly regarded he was as a parliamentarian, but I remember him simply for being a good friend, in good times and in difficult times. I do not mind admitting how much I miss that friendship. That said, David would expect us to look forward and to get on with the job in hand. I fully intend to do my very best for the Lothian region, which he represented so well for so long. Members will understand my sheer pride and sense of privilege in representing Edinburgh and the Lothians in the Parliament. We have just finished another tremendously successful Edinburgh international festival and fringe, when our capital is very much in the spotlight. People from across the globe come to enjoy the very best of the performing arts, to soak up the atmosphere of our historic capital and, of course, to marvel at the spectacle of our on-going tram works, which were originally due for completion in February 2011. Is that what the First Minister meant in his speech by a “constitutional journey”? One aspect that struck me during the festival and various fringes was the level of coverage and attention that they received from the media and members of the public throughout the UK. It is clear that interest and excitement over the annual arts festival is not confined to the Lothian region, nor to Scotland for that matter. It is obviously important for the whole of the United Kingdom. It is that relationship—the link between Edinburgh and the Lothians and the wider United Kingdom—that is so important to our future success and growth. Scotland is the UK’s second-biggest financial hub besides London. It accounts for 24 per cent of total jobs in the insurance sector. Edinburgh boasts the headquarters of Tesco Bank and Virgin Money and the global headquarters of RBS Group. All of that goes to show just how important the Scottish services sector is in the UK. From the perspective of Scotland, £45.5 billion was generated in exports to the rest of the UK. Of that, just under £10 billion came from financial and insurance activities alone. Scottish products and services are sold in large numbers throughout the United Kingdom: 84 per cent of mortgages provided by Scottish firms are sold to people living elsewhere in the UK; 67 per cent of individual savings accounts are sold to people living elsewhere in the UK; and 70 per cent of the pensions sold by Scottish firms are sold elsewhere in the UK. When we set out those terms, we see just how important the UK is to Scotland and, indeed, Scotland is to the UK. How vital it is for our future success to have continued access to that market for our services and goods on an equal and competitive footing. The rest of the UK is not our only market, of course. From my experience of the textile industry, I can vouch for the importance of our trade within the EU and the rest of Europe. Earlier this year, it was reported that Spanish MEPs—a conservative Catalonian and a nationalist Catalonian—were engaged in a bitter war of words over the responses of Spain and France to Scottish independence. That is confirmation that, along with energy, whisky, textiles and our other more established products and services, we now also export our constitutional wrangling to our neighbours in Europe. Who knows what untapped markets we may find for our newest product? The very public disagreement between Ramón Tremosa of the democratic convergence of Catalonia party and Alejo Vidal-Quadras of the Spanish people’s party exposes a good deal of unease elsewhere in Europe over the on-going debate about independence. It is not difficult to see where this unease comes from and why it is there, given the fact that the United Kingdom is not the only country where a constitutional debate is going on. There are many examples that I could give, but commentators have already noted the close attention that Brussels, Madrid and Berlin, among others, are paying to the debate and its outcome. That unease and concern are bound to colour their attitude to the accession of Scotland to the EU, which, in turn, will create uncertainty that will impact on the confidence of Scottish businesses and those companies that are looking to invest here. Scotland’s future success and prosperity will be largely determined by our relationships with those nations that surround us. Therefore, our link to the UK must be first and foremost. With such strong evidence about the benefits that the union brings us, it is surely crucial that we maintain and strengthen that bond rather than break it.